LAWS OF BRUNEI

LAWS OF BRUNEI

CHAPTER 190 MARRIED WOMEN

S 30/1999
2000 Edition, Chapter 190
Amended by S 63/2010

REVISED EDITION 2014

LAWS OF BRUNEI REVISED EDITION 2014

CHAPTER 190
MARRIED WOMEN

ARRANGEMENT OF SECTIONS
Section

PART I PRELIMINARY
1.	Citation.
2.	Non-application.
3.	Interpretation.

PART II
RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF HUSBAND AND WIFE
4.	Rights and duties.
5.	Abolition of wife's dependent domicile.
6.	Capacity of married woman.
7.	Property of married woman.
8.	Loans by wife to husband.
9.	Money and property derived from housekeeping allowance.
10.	Gifts by husband to wife.

11.	Remedies of married woman.
12.	Wife's antenuptial debts and liabilities.
13.	Actions in tort between husband and wife.
14.	Property disputes between husband and wife.
15.	Married woman as executrix or trustee.
16.	Settlements.
17.	Legal representative of married woman.
18.	Liability for breach of trust.

PART IIA PROTECTION OF FAMILY
18A.	Interpretation of this Part. 18B.	 Protection order.
18C.	Expedited order.
18D.	Provisions with respect to protection orders and expedited orders. 18E.	 Compensation.
18F.	Jurisdiction of High Court. 18G.	Procedure.
18H.	Power of arrest.
18I.	Information on offences involving domestic violence. 18J.	Duties of enforcement officer.
18K.	Place of protection.
18L.	Power of Director to place victim in place of protection. 18M.	Duties of Director.

PART III

MAINTENANCE OF WIVES AND CHILDREN

19. Court may order maintenance

20. Duty to maintain child

21. Enforcement of maintenance order

22. Rescission and variation of order

23. Power of Court of Magistrate to refuse order

24. Appeals

25. Repealed

26. Repealed

27. Repealed

28. Repealed

29. Repealed

PART IV ATTACHMENT OF EARNINGS

30. Power to make an attachment of earnings order

31. Nature of order

32. Effect of order

33. Duty of defendant and employer to comply

34. Additional powers of court

35. Obligation to notify changes

36. Power of court to determine earnings

37. Payment of money under order

38. Earnings paid by Government or out of Consolidated Fund

39. Penalties

40. Rules

PART V GENERAL

MARRIED WOMEN ACT
An Act to provide for the rights of married women and to provide for matters incidental thereto
Commencement: 1st August 1999

PART I PRELIMINARY

Citation.

1. This Act may be cited as the Married Women Act

Non-application.

2

This Act shall not apply in any matter if any of the parties professes the Islamic religion.
Interpretation.

3. In this Act, unless the context otherwise requires

"defendant", in relation to a maintenance order or a related attachment of earnings order, means the person liable to make payments under the maintenance order;
"earnings", in relation to a defendant, means any sums payable to him —
(a)	by way of wages or salary, including any fees, bonus, commission, overtime pay or other emoluments payable in addition to wages or salary by the person paying the wages or salary or payable under a contract of service;
(b)	by way of pension, including an annuity in respect of past services, whether or not the services were rendered to the person paying the annuity, and including periodical payments by way of compensation for the loss abolition or relinquishment, or any diminution in the emoluments, of any office or employment;

"employer" means a person by whom, as a principal and not as an employee or agent, earnings fall to be paid to a defendant, and references to payment of earnings shall be construed accordingly;
"maintenance order" means —
(a)	an order for the payment of a monthly allowance made or deemed to be made by a court under this Act;
(b)	an order for the payment of periodical sums by way of maintenance or alimony to a wife or for the benefit of any child under any other law; and
(c)	a maintenance order registered or confirmed by the court under the Maintenance Orders Reciprocal Enforcement Act (

Chapter 175)

PART II

RIGHTS AND DUTIES OF HUSBAND AND WIFE
Rights and duties.

4

(1) Upon the solemnisation of marriage, the husband and the wife shall be mutually bound to cooperate with each other in safeguarding the interests of the union and in caring and providing for the children.
(2)	The husband and the wife shall have the right separately to engage in any trade or profession or in social activities.
(3)	The wife shall have the right to use her own surname and name separately.
(4)	The husband and the wife shall have equal rights in the running of the matrimonial household.
Abolition of wife's dependent domicile.

5

(1) Subject to subsection (2), the domicile of a married woman shall, instead of being the same as her husband's by virtue only of marriage, be ascertained by reference to the same factors as in the case of any other individual capable of having an independent domicile.

(2) Where immediately before 1st August 1999, being the date of commencement of this Act, a woman was married and then had her husband's domicile by dependence, she is to be treated as retaining that domicile (as a domicile of choice, if it is not also her domicile of origin) unless it is changed by acquisition or revival of another domicile either on or after that date.
Capacity of married woman.

6. Subject to the provisions of this Act, a married woman shall

(a)	be capable of acquiring, holding and disposing of, any property;
(b)	be capable of rendering herself, and being rendered, liable in respect of any tort, contract, debt or obligation;
(c)	be capable of suing and being sued in her own name either in tort or in contract or otherwise and shall be entitled to all remedies and redress for all purposes; and
(d)	be subject to the law relating to bankruptcy and to the enforcement of judgments and orders,
in all respects as if she were a feme sole.
Property of married woman.

7. (1) Subject to provisions of this Act, all property which

(a)	immediately before 1st August 1999, being the date of commencement of this Act, was the property (including the separate property) of a married woman or held for her separate use in equity;
(b)	belongs at the time of her marriage to a woman married after 1st August 1999, being the date of commencement of this Act; or
(c)	after 1st August 1999, being the date of commencement of this Act, is acquired by or devolves upon a married woman,
shall belong to her in all respects as if she were a feme sole and may be disposed of accordingly.

(2)	Nothing in subsection (1) shall —
(a)	be construed as affecting adversely the right of any married woman to any property which she had immediately before 1st August 1999, being the date of commencement of this Act; or
(b)	interfere with or render inoperative any valid restriction upon anticipation or alienation attached to the enjoyment of any property by virtue of any provision contained in any written law in force immediately before 1st August 1999, being the date of commencement of this Act, or in any instrument executed before that date.
(3)	Any instrument executed on or after 1st August 1999, being the date of commencement of this Act, shall in so far as it purports to attach to the enjoyment of any property by a woman any restriction upon anticipation or alienation which could not have been attached to the enjoyment of that property by a man, be void.
(4)	For the purposes of this section relating to restrictions upon anticipation or alienation —
(a)	an instrument attaching such a restriction as aforesaid, executed on or after 1st August 1999, being the date of commencement of this Act, in pursuance of an obligation imposed before that date to attach such a restriction, shall be deemed to have been executed before that date;
(b)	a provision contained in an instrument made in exercise of a special power of appointment shall be deemed to be contained in that instrument only and not in the instrument by which the power was created; and
(c)	the will of any testator who dies after 1st August 1999, being the date of commencement of this Act, shall (notwithstanding the actual date of the execution thereof) be deemed to have been executed after that date.

Loans by wife to husband.

8

Any money or other estate of the wife, lent or entrusted by her to her husband for the purpose of any trade or business carried on by him or otherwise, shall be treated as assets of her husband's estate in case of his bankruptcy under reservation of the wife's claim to a dividend as a creditor for the amount or value of such money or other estate after, but not before, all claims of the other creditors of the husband for valuable consideration in money or money's worth have been satisfied.
Money and property derived from housekeeping allowance.

9

If any question arises as to the right of a husband or wife to money derived from any allowance made by the husband for the expenses of the matrimonial home or for similar purposes, or to any property acquired out of that money, the money or property shall, in the absence of any agreement between them to the contrary, be treated as belonging to the husband and the wife in equal shares.
Gifts by husband to wife.

10

Nothing in this Part shall give validity, as against creditors of the husband, to —
(a)	any gift by a husband to his wife of any property which, after such gift, continues to be in the order and disposition or reputed ownership of the husband; or
(b)	any deposit or other investment of moneys of the husband made by or in the name of his wife in fraud of his creditors but any moneys so deposited or invested may be followed as if this Act had not been passed.
Remedies of married woman.

11

(1) Every married woman shall have in her own name against all persons whomsoever, including her husband, the same civil remedies and also, subject as regards her husband to subsection (3), the same remedies and redress by way of criminal proceedings for the protection and security of her own property as if that property belonged to her as a feme sole.
(2)	In any charge or other proceedings under this section, it shall be sufficient to allege that property to be her property.

(3)	No criminal proceedings shall be taken against a husband or wife while they are living together as to or concerning any property claimed by her or him respectively nor while they are living apart as to or concerning any act done by the husband or wife while they were living together concerning property claimed by the wife or husband respectively unless that property has been wrongly taken by the husband or wife when leaving or deserting or about to leave or desert the wife or husband respectively.
(4)	In any action or proceedings by a woman or by a next friend on her behalf, the court before which that action or proceedings is pending shall have jurisdiction by judgment or order to order payment of the costs of the opposite party out of property which is subject to a restraint on anticipation, and may enforce such payment by the appointment of a receiver and the sale of the property or otherwise as is just.
Wife's antenuptial debts and liabilities.

12

(1) A woman after her marriage shall continue to be liable for all debts contracted and all contracts entered into or wrongs committed by her before her marriage, including any sums for which she is liable as a contributory, either before or after she has been placed on the list of contributories under and by virtue of the Companies Act (

Chapter 39)

(2) A woman referred to in subsection (1) may be sued for any such debt and for any liability in damages or otherwise under any such contract or in respect of any such wrong.
Actions in tort between husband and wife.

13

(1) Subject to this section, each of the parties to a marriage shall have the like right of action in tort against the other as if they were not married.
(2)	Where an action in tort is brought by one of the parties to a marriage against the other during the subsistence of the marriage, the court may stay the action if it appears that —
(a)	no substantial benefit would accrue to either party from the continuation of the proceedings; or
(b)	the question or questions in issue could more conveniently be disposed of on an application made under section 14,

and without prejudice to paragraph (b) the court may, in such an action, either exercise any power which could be exercised on an application under section 14, or give such directions as it thinks fit for the disposal under that section of any question arising in the proceedings.
Property disputes between husband and wife.

14

(1) In any question between husband and wife as to the title to or possession of property, either party may apply by summons or otherwise in a summary way to a Judge of the Supreme Court, who may make such order with respect to the property in dispute and as to the costs of and consequent on the application as he thinks fit, or may direct the application to stand over, and any inquiry touching the matters in question to be made in such manner as he thinks fit.
(2)	Any order made under this section shall be subject to appeal in the same way as an order made by a Judge in an action pending in the High Court.
(3)	The Judge may, if either party so requires, hear any such application in his chambers.
(4)	An application may be made under this section by either of the parties to a marriage notwithstanding that their marriage has been dissolved or annulled so long as the application is made within the period of 3 years beginning with the date on which the marriage was dissolved or annulled; and references in this section to a husband or a wife shall be construed accordingly.
Married woman as executrix or trustee.

15. A married woman who is

(a)	an executrix or administratrix, alone or jointly with any other person or persons, of the estate of any deceased person; or
(b)	a trustee alone or jointly as aforesaid of property subject to any trust,
may sue or be sued, and may transfer or join in transferring any movable or immovable property belonging to the estate or trust without her husband as if she were a feme sole.

Settlement.

16. (1) Nothing in this Part shall

(a)	interfere with or affect any settlement or agreement for a settlement made or to be made, whether before or after marriage, respecting the property of any married woman; or
(b)	interfere with or render inoperative any restriction against anticipation at present attached or to be hereafter attached to the enjoyment of any property or income by a woman under any settlement, agreement for a settlement, will or other instrument.
(2) No restriction against anticipation contained in any settlement or agreement for a settlement of a woman's own property, to be made or entered into by herself, shall have any validity against debts contracted by her before marriage, and no settlement or agreement for a settlement shall have any greater force or validity against creditors of that woman than a like settlement or agreement for a settlement made or entered into by a man would have against his creditors.
Legal representative of married woman.

17

For the purposes of this Part, the legal personal representative of any married woman shall, in respect of her estate, have the same rights and liabilities as she would have, and be subject to the same jurisdiction as she would be, if she were living.
Liability for breach of trust.

18

The provisions of this Part as to liabilities of married women shall extend to all liabilities by reason of any breach of trust or devastavit committed by any married woman being a trustee or executrix or administratrix either before or after her marriage, and her husband shall not be subject to those liabilities unless he has acted or intermeddled in the trust or administration.

PART IIA	[S 63/2010]

PROTECTION OF FAMILY
Interpretation of this Part.
18A.	(1) In this Part, unless the context otherwise requires — "court" means a Court of a Magistrate;
"domestic violence" means the commission of any of the following acts —
(a)	wilfully or knowingly causing, or attempting to cause, a family member in fear of hurt;
(b)	causing hurt to a family member by such act which is known or ought to have been known would result in hurt;
(c)	compelling the family member by force or threat to engage in any conduct or act from which he has a right to abstain;
(d)	wrongfully confining or restraining a family member against his will;
(e)	continual harassment with intent to cause distress, annoyance or humiliation, or knowing that it is likely to cause distress, annoyance or humiliation, to a family member; or
(f)	causing destruction, damage or loss to property of a family member or causing financial loss to a family member;
"enforcement officer" means a police officer or any person appointed in writing by the Director of Community Development;
"expedited order" means an order made under section 18C(1); "family member", in relation to a person, means —
(a)	a spouse or former spouse of that person;
(b)	a child of that person and their descendants, including an adopted child and a step-child;
(c)	the father or mother of that person;
(d)	a father-in-law or mother-in-law of that person;

(e)	a brother or sister of that person;
(f)	a grandfather or grandmother of that person or any of their ascendants whether on the side of the father or mother of that person; or
(g)	any relative or other person who in the opinion of the court should, in the circumstances, be regarded as a member of the family of that person;
"incapacitated adult" means an adult who is wholly or partially incapacitated or infirm, by reason of physical or mental disability, ill-health or old age;
"place of protection" means any place or institution —
(a)	declared as such under section 18K(1);
(b)	maintained or managed by any agency or voluntary organisation approved by the Minister of Culture, Youth and Sports for the purposes of this Part; or
(c)	suitable whereby the owner, occupier or manager is willing to receive the victim;
"protected person" means a person who is protected under a protection order or an expedited order;
"protection order" means an order made under section 18B(1);
"relative" means a person who is related through the full-blood or half-blood, or through marriage, fostering or adoption, including de facto adoption;
"shared residence" means the premises at which the parties are, or have been, living together as members of the same household;
"victim" means a victim of domestic violence.
(2) Nothing in this Part shall derogate from the provisions of the Penal Code (

Chapter 22) or of any other written law

Protection order.
18B. (1) The court may, upon being satisfied that domestic violence has been committed or is likely to be committed by any person against a family member and that it is necessary for the protection of that family member,

make a protection order restraining that person from committing domestic violence against that family member.
(2)	An application under this Part may be made by —
(a)	the family member concerned;
(b)	an enforcement officer; or
(c)	in the case of a child or an incapacitated adult, a guardian, a relative or the person responsible for the care of that child or incapacitated adult, or by any person appointed by the Director of Community Development.
(3)	A protection order may be made subject to such exceptions or conditions as may be specified in the order and for such period as may be specified therein.
(4)	The court, in making a protection order, may include a provision that the person against whom the order is made shall not incite or assist any other person to commit domestic violence against the protected person.
(5)	A protection order may, where the court is satisfied that it is necessary for the protection of the protected person, provide for such orders as it thinks fit, having regard to all the circumstances of the case, including any one or more of the following orders —
(a)	granting the right of exclusive occupation to the protected person of the shared residence or any specified part of the shared residence by excluding the person against whom the order is made from the shared residence or specified part thereof, regardless of whether the shared residence is solely owned or leased by the person against whom the order is made or jointly owned or leased by the parties;
(b)	prohibiting or restraining the person against whom the order is made from —
(i)	entering the protected person's place of residence, shared residence or alternative residence;
(ii)	entering the protected person's place of employment, school or other institution; or

(iii)	making personal contact with the protected person other than in the presence of an enforcement officer or such other person as may be specified or described in the order;
(c)	requiring the person against whom the order is made to permit the protected person to enter —
(i)	the shared residence; or
(ii)	the residence of the person against whom the order is made,
accompanied by any enforcement officer for the purpose of collecting the protected person's personal belongings;
(d)	specifying the circumstances in which the person against whom the order is made may be permitted to communicate with the protected person;
(e)	requiring the person against whom the order is made to permit the protected person to have the continued use of a vehicle which has previously been ordinarily used by the protected person;
(f)	requiring the person against whom the order is made, the protected person, both of them or their children to attend counselling provided by such person as the Director of Community Development may approve or as the court may direct;
(g)	requiring the person against whom the order is made to pay compensation under section 18E to the protected person in respect of any injuries, destruction, damage or loss as it considers just and reasonable;
(h)	placing the protected person in any suitable place of protection for the safety of the protected person,
and giving such directions as are necessary for or incidental to the proper carrying into effect of any such orders.

(6)	Except so far as the exercise by the person against whom a protection order is made of a right to the shared residence is suspended, restricted, prohibited or restrained by virtue of an order made under subsection (5), such order shall not affect any title or interest that the person against whom the order is made or any other person might have in that residence.
(7)	Except so far as the exercise by the person against whom a protection order is made under subsection (5), such order shall not affect a right to maintenance or any other right to which the protected person is entitled under the Act.
Expedited order.
18C. (1) Where, upon an application for a protection order under section 18B, the court is satisfied that domestic violence has been or is being committed that requires an expedited protection, the court may make an expedited order notwithstanding that —
(a)	the summons has not been served on the respondent or has not been served on the respondent within a reasonable time before the hearing of the application; or
(b)	the summons requires the respondent to appear at some time or place.
(2)	An expedited order shall not take effect until the date on which notice of the making of the order is served on the respondent or, if the court has specified a later date as the date on which the order is to take effect, that later date.
(3)	An expedited date shall cease to have effect on whichever of the following dates occurs first —
(a)	the date of the expiration of a period of 28 days beginning with the date of the making of the order; or
(b)	the date of commencement of the hearing of the application for an order under this section.
(4)	Notwithstanding subsection (3), the court may extend the duration of the expedited order.

Provisions with respect to protection orders and expedited orders.
18D. (1) Where the court is satisfied that the person against whom a protection order or expedited order is made is likely to commit domestic violence to the protected person, the court may attach a power of arrest to such protection order or expedited order.
(2)	If a power of arrest is attached by virtue of subsection (1), a police officer may arrest without warrant the person against whom the order is made when he has reasonable cause to believe that he is in breach of a protection order, an expedited order or an order made under sections 18B(5)(a) or (b), by reason of that person's use of violence or of his entry into any place prohibited under the order.
(3)	Where a power of arrest is attached to a protection order or an expedited order and the person against whom such order is made is arrested under subsection (2) —
(a)	he shall be brought to court within 48 hours of his arrest;
and
(b)	he shall not be released within that period except on the
direction of the court, but nothing in this subsection shall authorise his continued detention under this paragraph after the expiry of that period.
(4)	Where a person against whom a protection order or an expedited order has been made contravenes such order, the court may, in addition to any penalty provided under subsection (5), make any one or more of the orders under section 18B(5), to commence from such date as is specified in such latter order or orders.
(5)	Any person who wilfully contravenes a protection order, an expedited order or an order made under section 18B(5) is guilty of an offence and liable on conviction to a fine not exceeding $2,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months or both and, in the case of a second or subsequent offence, to a fine not exceeding $5,000, imprisonment for a term not exceeding one year or both.
(6)	The court shall, on application made by the applicant or the person against whom a protection order or an expedited order is made, have power by order to vary, suspend or revoke any such order.

(7)	The expiry by virtue of section 18C(3) of an expedited order shall not prejudice the making of a further expedited order under that section.
Compensation.
18E. (1) Where a victim of domestic violence suffers personal injuries, destruction or damage to property, loss of property or financial loss as a result of the domestic violence, the court may award such compensation in respect of such injuries, destruction, damage or loss as it considers just and reasonable.
(2)	The court may take into account —
(a)	the pain and suffering of the victim, and the nature and extent of the physical or mental injury suffered;
(b)	the cost of medical treatment for any such injury;
(c)	any loss of earnings arising from any such injury;
(d)	the amount or value of the property destroyed, damaged or
lost;
(e)	necessary and reasonable expenses incurred by or on behalf
of the victim when he is compelled to separate or be separated from the defendant due to the domestic violence, such as —
(i)	lodging expenses to be contributed to a place of protection;
(ii)	transport and moving expenses;
(iii)	the expenses required in setting up a separate household which, subject to subsection (3), may include amounts representing such housing loan payments or rental payments or part thereof, in respect of the shared residence or alternative residence, for such period as the court considers appropriate.
(3)	In considering any expenses that may be taken into account under subsection (2)(e)(iii), the court may also take into account —
(a)	the financial position of the victim as well as that of the defendant;

(b)	maintenance to be paid or any other obligatory expenses to be made or contributed by the defendant that arises from the relationship that exists between the parties;
(c)	the possibility of other proceedings being taken between the parties and the matter being more appropriately dealt with under other provisions of the Act or any other written law relating to the financial provision of spouses or former spouses and other dependants.
Jurisdiction of High Court.
18F.  The High Court shall have the jurisdiction and powers which belong to and are exercisable by a Court of a Magistrate under this Part and Part III.
Procedure.
18G.  (1) All applications to a Court of a Magistrate under this Part and Part III shall be made and heard in the same manner and in accordance with the same procedure as applications for summonses are made and heard by the Court of a Magistrate under the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code (

Chapter 7) and shall be deemed to be complaints for the purposes of that Code

(2)	The Chief Justice may make rules for the purpose of giving effect to sections 18B and 18C and any such rules may in particular, but without prejudice to the generality of this subsection, make provision for the hearing without delay of any application for an order under section 18B(5)(a).
(3)	A court before which any application is heard may make such order as to costs as it thinks just and reasonable.
Power of arrest.
18H. (1) Where a police officer believes on reasonable grounds that domestic violence has been committed or is likely to be committed by any

Information on offences involving domestic violence.
18I. (1) Any person who has reason to believe that an offence involving domestic violence is being or has been committed may give information in respect thereof to an enforcement officer.
(2)	No person who gives any such information in good faith shall incur any liability for defamation or otherwise in respect of the giving of such information.
Duties of enforcement officer.
18J.  (1) The duties of an enforcement officer include —
(a)	assisting a victim to file a complaint regarding the domestic violence;
(b)	providing or arranging transportation for the victim to an alternative residence or to a place of protection if such transportation is required;
(c)	providing or arranging transportation for the victim to the nearest hospital or medical facility for treatment of injuries if such treatment is needed;
(d)	explaining to the victim his rights to protection against domestic violence;
(e)	accompanying the victim to his residence or previous residence to collect his personal belongings;
(f)	such other duties as are necessary or expedient for giving effect to and carrying out the provisions of this Part.
(2)	An enforcement officer who is also police officer has the following additional duties —
(a)	exercising the powers of arrest under this Part or under any other written law;
(b)	removing or supervising the removal of a person excluded from a shared residence where the court has issued an order under section 18B(5)(a).

Place of protection.
18K. (1) The Minister of Culture, Youth and Sports may, by notification published in the Gazette, declare any place or institution to be a place of protection for the purposes of this Part.
(2) The Permanent Secretary to the Ministry of Culture, Youth and Sports may order the transfer of protected persons from one place of protection to another as and when the need arises.
Power of Director to place victim in place of protection.
18L. The Director of Community Development may, upon being satisfied that domestic violence has been or is being committed against a family member and that it is necessary for the protection of that family member, place that family member in a place of protection until application for a protection order or an expedited order can be made.
Duties of Director.
18M. The Director of Community Development shall be responsible for the reception, care, welfare and safety of any victim sent to a place of protection under this Part for the period for which the victim is in that place of protection.

PART III

MAINTENANCE OF WIVES AND CHILDREN
Court may order maintenance.

19

(1) Any married woman whose husband neglects or refuses to provide her reasonable maintenance may apply to a Court of a Magistrate and that court may, on due proof thereof, order the husband to pay a monthly allowance or a lump sum for her maintenance.

(4)	The court, when ordering maintenance for a wife or child under this section, shall have regard to all the circumstances of the case including the following matters —
(a)	the financial needs of the wife or child;
(b)	the income, earning capacity (if any), property and other financial resources of the wife or child;
(c)	any physical or mental disability of the wife or child; and
(d)	the standard of living enjoyed by the applicant before the husband or father neglected or refused to provide reasonable maintenance for the wife or child.
(5)	An application for the maintenance of a child under subsection (2) may be made by any person who is the guardian or has the actual custody of the child.
(6)	The court shall have the same powers as are conferred by section 34 in respect of proceedings relating to an attachment of earnings order.
Duty to maintain child.

20

(1) Where a person has accepted a child who is not his child as a member of his family, it shall be his duty to maintain that child while he remains a child, so far as the father or the mother of the child fails to do so, and the court may make such orders as may be necessary to ensure the welfare of the child:
Provided that the duty imposed by this subsection shall cease if the child is taken away by his father or mother.
(2) Any sums expended by a person maintaining that child shall be recoverable as a debt from the father or mother of the child.
Enforcement of maintenance order.

21

(1) If any person fails to make one or more payments required to be made under a maintenance order, the court which made the order may for every breach of the order by warrant direct the amount due to be levied in the manner by law provided for levying fines imposed by a Court of a

Magistrate, or may sentence him to imprisonment for a term not exceeding one month for each month's allowance remaining unpaid.
(2) A maintenance order made by the High Court may be enforced by a Court of a Magistrate in accordance with subsection (1) as if that order had been made by the Court of a Magistrate, except that a Court of a Magistrate shall have no power to vary an order of the High Court.
Rescission and variation of order.

22

(1) On the application of any person receiving or ordered to pay a monthly allowance under this Part and on proof of a change in the circumstances of that person, his wife or child, or for other good cause being shown to the satisfaction of the court, the court by which the order was made may rescind the order or may vary it as it thinks fit.
(2) Without prejudice to the extent of the discretion conferred upon the court by subsection (1), the court may, in considering any application made under this section, take into consideration any change in the general cost of living which may have occurred between the date of the making of the order sought to be varied and the date of the hearing of the application.
Power of Court of Magistrate to refuse order.

23

If in the opinion of the Court of a Magistrate the matters in question between the parties or any of them would be more conveniently dealt with by the High Court, the court may refuse to make an order and in that case there shall be no appeal from its decision:
Provided that the High Court or a Judge thereof shall have power, by order, in any proceedings in the High Court relating to or comprising the same subject matter as the application refused as aforesaid or any part thereof, to direct the court to rehear or determine the same.
Appeals.

24

(1) Subject to the provisions of this Part, an appeal shall lie from any order or the refusal of any order by a Court of a Magistrate under this Part to the High Court exercising appellate civil jurisdiction under the provisions of the Supreme Court Act (

Chapter 5)

(2) No appeal made under the provisions of this Part from any order

25. (Repealed)

[S 63/2010]

26. (Repealed)

[S 63/2010]

27. (Repealed)

[S 63/2010]

28. (Repealed)

[S 63/2010]

29. (Repealed)

[S 63/2010]

PART IV ATTACHMENT OF EARNINGS

Power to make an attachment of earnings order.

30

(1) Jika mana-mana orang gagal mematuhi apa-apa perintah nafkah, mahkamah yang membuat perintah itu boleh bagi setiap pelanggaran perintah itu membuat suatu perintah lampiran pendapatan.
(2)	Mahkamah hendaklah tidak, kecuali dengan persetujuan defendan, membuat suatu perintah lampiran pendapatan untuk menjamin pembayaran mengikut suatu perintah nafkah jika adalah nyata kepadanya bahawa kegagalan defendan mematuhi perintah nafkah itu bukan disebabkan oleh keengganan sengajanya atau kecuaian bersalahnya.
(3)	Mahkamah Majistret boleh membuat suatu perintah lampiran pendapatan untuk menjamin pembayaran yang defendan dikehendaki membuat di bawah suatu perintah nafkah yang dibuat oleh Mahkamah Tinggi.

Sifat perintah.

31

(1) Suatu perintah lampiran pendapatan hendaklah menghendaki orang kepada siapa perintah berkenaan diarahkan, iaitu seseorang yang kelihatan kepada mahkamah sebagai majikan defendan, membuat daripada pendapatan yang perlu dibayar kepada defendan pembayaran bagi memenuhi perintah itu.
(2)	Amaun yang hendak ditetapkan dalam suatu perintah lampiran pendapatan hendaklah suatu jumlah yang pada mahkamah kelihatan munasabah setelah mengambil kira sumber dan keperluan defendan dan keperluan orang yang mana dia mesti atau sepatutnya memperuntukkan.
(3)	Suatu perintah lampiran pendapatan hendaklah mengandungi, setakat yang diketahui oleh mahkamah yang membuat perintah itu, butir-butir yang boleh ditetapkan bagi maksud membolehkan defendan dikenal pasti oleh orang kepada siapa perintah itu diarahkan.
(4)	Suatu perintah lampiran pendapatan atau apa-apa variasi daripadanya hendaklah tidak berkuat kuasa sehingga tamat tempoh 7 hari dari tarikh apabila salinan perintah itu disampaikan kepada orang kepada siapa perintah itu diarahkan.
(5)	Suatu perintah lampiran pendapatan hendaklah menetapkan pegawai kepada siapa pembayaran di bawah perintah itu hendak dibuat.
Kesan perintah.

32

(1) Apabila suatu perintah lampiran pendapatan dibuat, semua prosiding lain bagi penguatkuasaan perintah nafkah berkaitan yang dimulakan sebelum pembuatan perintah lampiran pendapatan itu hendaklah digantung.
(2)	Mahkamah yang mana suatu perintah lampiran pendapatan telah dibuat boleh, jika ia fikirkan patut, atas permohonan defendan atau seseorang yang berhak menerima pembayaran di bawah perintah nafkah berkaitan, membuat suatu perintah melepaskan atau memvariasikan perintah lampiran pendapatan itu.
(3)	Suatu perintah lampiran pendapatan hendaklah terhenti berkuat kuasa —
(a)	apabila pengeluaran suatu waran mengarahkan bahawa amaun yang kena dibayar di bawah perintah nafkah berkaitan hendaklah dipungut mengikut cara yang diperuntukkan oleh undang-undang untuk memungut denda;

(b)	apabila pembuatan suatu perintah menghukum defendan kepada penjara kerana kegagalan mematuhi perintah nafkah berkaitan; dan
(c)	apabila pembatalan perintah nafkah berkaitan,
dan di mana suatu perintah lampiran pendapatan terhenti berkuat kuasa seperti tersebut di atas mahkamah yang membuat perintah itu hendaklah memberi notis tentang pemberhentian itu kepada orang kepada siapa perintah itu diarahkan.
Kewajipan defendan dan majikan untuk mematuhi.

33

(1) Seseorang kepada siapa suatu perintah lampiran pendapatan diarahkan hendaklah, walau apa pun dalam mana-mana undang-undang bertulis lain tetapi tertakluk kepada peruntukan Bahagian ini, mematuhi perintah itu atau, jika perintah itu kemudiannya divariasikan di bawah seksyen 32 dengan perintah seperti yang divariasikan.
(2)	Di mana pada apa-apa masa apabila pendapatan perlu dibayar kepada seorang defendan terdapat berkuat kuasa dua atau lebih perintah lampiran pendapatan berkaitan dengan pendapatan tersebut, maka, bagi maksud mematuhi Bahagian ini, majikan hendaklah —
(a)	berurusan dengan perintah-perintah tersebut mengikut tarikh masing-masing apabila ia berkuat kuasa dengan tidak mengendahkan apa-apa perintah kemudian sehingga semua perintah terdahulu telah diuruskan; dan
(b)	berurusan dengan apa-apa perintah kemudian seolah-olah pendapatan yang berkaitan dengannya adalah baki pendapatan defendan selepas pembuatan apa-apa pembayaran di bawah Bahagian ini menurut apa-apa perintah terdahulu.
(3)	Seorang majikan yang, menurut suatu perintah lampiran pendapatan, membuat suatu pembayaran di bawah Bahagian ini, hendaklah memberi kepada defendan suatu penyata secara bertulis menyatakan amaun pembayaran itu.
(4)	Seseorang kepada siapa suatu perintah lampiran pendapatan diarahkan yang, pada masa apabila salinan perintah itu disampaikan kepadanya, tidak pada apa-apa masa dalam tempoh satu bulan yang mendahului masa itu menjadi majikan defendan hendaklah dengan serta-merta memberi notis secara bertulis mengenai kesan itu dalam borang yang ditetapkan kepada mahkamah yang membuat perintah itu.

Kuasa tambahan mahkamah.

34

(1) Di mana prosiding berkaitan dengan suatu perintah lampiran pendapatan dibawa di mana-mana mahkamah, mahkamah boleh, sama ada sebelum atau pada pendengaran —
(a)	memerintahkan defendan memberi kepada mahkamah, dalam tempoh yang boleh dinyatakan oleh perintah itu, suatu penyata yang ditandatangani olehnya tentang —
(i)	nama dan alamat majikannya, atau setiap majikannya jika dia mempunyai lebih daripada satu;
(ii)	butir-butir tentang pendapatan defendan yang boleh dinyatakan sedemikian; dan
(iii)	butir-butir yang ditetapkan yang boleh dinyatakan sedemikian bagi maksud membolehkan defendan dikenal pasti oleh mana-mana majikannya; dan
(b)	memerintahkan mana-mana orang yang kelihatan kepada mahkamah sebagai majikan defendan memberi kepada mahkamah, dalam tempoh yang boleh dinyatakan oleh perintah itu, suatu penyata yang ditandatangani olehnya atau bagi pihaknya tentang butir-butir yang boleh dinyatakan oleh perintah itu mengenai semua pendapatan defendan yang perlu dibayar oleh orang itu dalam tempoh yang boleh dinyatakan sedemikian.
(2) Suatu dokumen yang dikatakan sebagai suatu penyata seperti yang disebut dalam subseksyen (1) hendaklah, dalam apa-apa prosiding seperti yang disebut sedemikian, diterima sebagai keterangan dan disifatkan sebagai suatu penyata sedemikian tanpa pembuktian lanjut melainkan jika yang sebaliknya ditunjukkan.
Kewajipan untuk memberitahu perubahan.

35. Semasa suatu perintah lampiran pendapatan berkuat kuasa

(a)	defendan hendaklah memberitahu secara bertulis mahkamah yang membuat perintah itu tentang setiap masa apabila dia meninggalkan apa-apa pekerjaan, atau menjadi bekerja atau bekerja semula, tidak lewat (dalam setiap kes) daripada 7 hari dari tarikh apabila dia berbuat demikian;
(b)	defendan hendaklah, pada apa-apa masa apabila dia menjadi bekerja atau bekerja semula, memasukkan dalam pemberitahuannya di bawah perenggan (a) butir-butir pendapatan dan pendapatan yang dijangkakan daripada pekerjaan berkaitan; dan

(c)	mana-mana orang yang menjadi majikan defendan dan mengetahui bahawa perintah itu berkuat kuasa dan oleh mahkamah mana ia dibuat hendaklah, dalam tempoh 7 hari dari menjadi majikan defendan atau dari memperoleh pengetahuan itu (yang mana kemudian), memberitahu mahkamah itu secara bertulis bahawa dia adalah majikan defendan, dan memasukkan dalam pemberitahuannya suatu penyata tentang pendapatan dan pendapatan yang dijangkakan defendan.
Kuasa mahkamah untuk menentukan pendapatan.

36

(1) Mahkamah yang mana suatu perintah lampiran pendapatan telah dibuat hendaklah, atas permohonan orang kepada siapa perintah itu diarahkan atau defendan atau orang yang memihak kepadanya perintah itu dibuat, menentukan sama ada pembayaran kepada defendan daripada suatu kelas atau perihal tertentu yang dinyatakan oleh permohonan itu adalah pendapatan bagi maksud perintah itu; dan orang kepada siapa perintah itu diarahkan hendaklah berhak memberi kesan kepada apa-apa penentuan buat masa ini yang berkuat kuasa di bawah subseksyen ini.
(2) Seseorang kepada siapa suatu perintah lampiran pendapatan diarahkan yang membuat suatu permohonan di bawah subseksyen (1) hendaklah tidak menanggung apa-apa liabiliti kerana gagal mematuhi perintah itu berkenaan dengan apa-apa pembayaran daripada kelas atau perihal yang dinyatakan oleh permohonan itu yang dibuat olehnya kepada defendan semasa permohonan itu, atau apa-apa rayuan susulan daripadanya, belum selesai:
Dengan syarat bahawa subseksyen ini hendaklah tidak terpakai berkenaan dengan pembayaran sedemikian jika orang itu kemudiannya menarik balik permohonan itu atau, mengikut mana yang berkenaan, meninggalkan rayuan itu.
Pembayaran wang di bawah perintah.

37

(1) Mahkamah yang mana majikan membayar apa-apa jumlah menurut suatu perintah penyitaan pendapatan hendaklah membayar jumlah itu kepada orang yang berhak menerima bayaran di bawah perintah nafkah yang berkaitan sebagaimana yang dinyatakan oleh perintah penyitaan pendapatan itu.
(2) Apa-apa jumlah yang diterima dengan kelebihan perintah penyitaan pendapatan oleh mahkamah hendaklah disifatkan sebagai bayaran yang dibuat oleh defendan, supaya melunaskan pertama apa-apa jumlah bagi masa itu yang kena dibayar dan belum dibayar di bawah perintah nafkah yang berkaitan (suatu jumlah yang kena dibayar pada tarikh yang lebih awal dilunaskan sebelum suatu jumlah yang kena dibayar pada tarikh yang kemudian) dan kedua apa-apa kos yang ditanggung dalam prosiding yang berkaitan dengan perintah nafkah yang perlu dibayar oleh defendan apabila perintah penyitaan pendapatan itu dibuat atau diubah kali terakhir.

Pendapatan yang dibayar oleh Kerajaan atau daripada Kumpulan Wang Disatukan.

38

(1) Berhubung dengan pendapatan yang perlu dibayar oleh Kerajaan atau daripada Kumpulan Wang Disatukan, pendapatan itu hendaklah dianggap sebagai perlu dibayar oleh ketua pegawai bagi masa itu bagi jabatan, pejabat atau badan lain yang berkenaan.
(2) Jika apa-apa persoalan timbul, berhubung dengan apa-apa prosiding yang berkaitan dengan suatu perintah penyitaan pendapatan, tentang jabatan, pegawai atau badan lain yang manakah yang berkenaan bagi maksud seksyen ini, atau tentang siapakah bagi maksud itu ketua pegawainya, persoalan itu hendaklah dirujuk kepada dan ditentukan oleh Menteri Kewangan, tetapi Menteri Kewangan tidaklah di bawah apa-apa kewajipan untuk mempertimbangkan rujukan di bawah subseksyen ini melainkan jika ia dibuat oleh suatu mahkamah.
(3) Suatu dokumen yang dikatakan mengandungi suatu penentuan Menteri Kewangan di bawah subseksyen (2) dan ditandatangani oleh seorang pegawai Kementerian Kewangan hendaklah, dalam apa-apa prosiding yang disebut dalam subseksyen itu, boleh diterima sebagai keterangan dan disifatkan mengandungi suatu kenyataan yang tepat tentang penentuan sedemikian melainkan jika yang sebaliknya ditunjukkan.
Penalti.

39. (1) Mana-mana orang yang

(a) gagal mematuhi seksyen 33(1) atau (4) atau suatu perintah mahkamah di bawah seksyen 34(1);
(b) memberi notis seperti yang disebut dalam seksyen 33(4) atau suatu penyata menurut suatu perintah mahkamah di bawah seksyen 34(1), yang mana notis atau penyata itu diketahuinya adalah palsu dalam suatu perkara yang material; atau
(c) dengan melulu memberi notis atau penyata sedemikian yang adalah palsu dalam suatu perkara yang material,
hendaklah, tertakluk kepada subseksyen (2), adalah melakukan suatu kesalahan dan boleh disabitkan dengan denda tidak melebihi $5,000, penjara untuk suatu tempoh tidak melebihi satu tahun atau kedua-duanya.
(2) Adalah menjadi suatu pembelaan bagi seseorang yang didakwa kerana gagal mematuhi seksyen 33(1) untuk membuktikan bahawa dia telah mengambil semua langkah yang munasabah untuk mematuhi perintah penyitaan pendapatan yang mana kegagalan itu berkaitan dengannya.

BAHAGIAN V AM

Kaedah-kaedah.

40

Ketua Hakim Negara boleh, dengan kelulusan Kebawah Duli Yang Maha Mulia Paduka Seri Baginda Sultan dan Yang Di-Pertuan, membuat kaedah-kaedah secara am bagi melaksanakan peruntukan-peruntukan Akta ini.
