BURKINA FASO IVE REPUBLIC

BURKINA FASO	IVE REPUBLIC-----------	SEVENTH LEGISLATURE
UNITY-PROGRESS-JUSTICE----------- NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

LAW NO. 025-2018/AN
ON THE PENAL CODE

THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY

Having regard to	the Constitution;

Having regard to	resolution no. 001-2015/AN of 30 December 2015 on the validation of the mandate of deputies;

deliberated in its session of 31 May 2018 and adopted the law whose content follows:

BOOK I

GENERAL PROVISIONS TITLE I: CRIMINAL LAW

CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PRINCIPLES

Article 111-1

No offence may be punished and no penalty imposed unless they are legally provided for.

Article 111-2

Criminal law is to be strictly construed.
Only acts constituting an offence at the date on which they were committed are punishable.

Article 111-3

No one may be declared criminally liable and incur a sanction as a result unless he or she has committed an offence.

Article 111-4

There is no crime or offence without intent to commit it.
However, where the law so provides, there is an offence in the case of deliberate endangerment of the person of another and in the case of recklessness, negligence or breach of an obligation of care or safety provided for by law or regulation.
In the cases provided for in the preceding paragraph, natural persons who have not directly caused the damage, but who have created or contributed to creating the situation which enabled the damage to occur or who have not taken measures to avoid it, are criminally liable if it is established that they have either deliberately violated a particular obligation of care or safety provided for by law or regulation, or committed a gross fault which exposed others to a serious risk of which they could not have been unaware.

Article 111-5

Every person is entitled, in full equality, to a fair and public hearing by an independent and impartial tribunal, which shall determine either his or her rights and obligations or the merits of any criminal charge against him or her.

Article 111-6

Every person accused of committing an offence is presumed innocent until his or her guilt has been legally established.
No one may be found guilty of an offence or sentenced to a penalty otherwise than by decision of a competent court.

Article 111-7

Treaties, agreements or conventions duly ratified and published take precedence over domestic criminal provisions.

Article 111-8

There is a concurrence of offences where an offence is committed by a person before that person has been finally convicted of another offence.
In the event of conviction for several crimes or offences, only the most severe penalty shall be imposed.
Penalties are cumulative in the case of actual concurrence between contraventions, between offences and non-connected contraventions or between crimes and non-connected contraventions.

Article 111-9

Where an individual is the subject of several convictions for crimes or offences resulting from separate prosecutions before any court, merger of penalties must be ordered.
Where a principal penalty is the subject of a pardon, account must be taken, for the purposes of merger of penalties, of the penalty resulting from the commutation and not of the penalty initially imposed.

CHAPTER 2: APPLICATION OF CRIMINAL LAW IN TIME

Article 112-1

A law which removes the punishable nature of an act has retroactive effect. It stops any prosecution in progress as well as the execution of the penalty imposed.
A law which reduces a penalty has retroactive effect. It applies to offences committed before it enters into force and which have not given rise to a conviction which has become final.
A law which makes an act punishable or which increases a penalty has no retroactive effect.

CHAPTER 3: APPLICATION OF CRIMINAL LAW IN SPACE

Article 113-1

Burkinabè criminal law applies to any offence committed on national territory regardless of the nationality of its perpetrator.
Criminal law also applies to offences committed by a national or against a national outside national territory where the acts are punishable under the legislation of the country where they were committed. Prosecution in this case must be preceded by a complaint from the victim or an official denunciation by the authority of the country where the acts were committed.
Prosecution ceases in the case where the person proves that he or she has been finally tried abroad for the same acts, and in the case of conviction, where the penalty has been executed or is time-barred.
Burkinabè criminal law is also applicable to offences committed on board aircraft registered in Burkina Faso, or aircraft leased without crew and operated by persons meeting the conditions to be the owner of an aircraft in Burkina Faso, or against persons on board. It alone is applicable to offences committed on board Burkinabè military aircraft, or against persons on board such aircraft.
It is also applicable to offences committed on board a vessel registered under Burkinabè law or in respect of which a permit or

identification number has been issued in accordance with that law, or on board a vessel registered abroad and belonging to the Burkinabè State or against persons on board such vessels.
For the purposes of this article, Burkinabè courts have jurisdiction.

Article 113-2

Where the extradition, expulsion or refoulement of a person is refused by the Burkinabè authorities to a State where that person faces the risk of being subjected to torture or similar practices, Burkinabè courts have jurisdiction to try the person provided that the acts which are the subject of the request for surrender are provided for and punishable under the legislation in force in Burkina Faso or if they constitute an international crime.

TITLE II

THE OFFENCE AND THE ATTEMPT CHAPTER 1: CLASSIFICATION OF OFFENCES

Article 121-1

Offences punishable by life imprisonment or by imprisonment exceeding ten years are classified as crimes.
Offences punishable by imprisonment of at least thirty days and not exceeding ten years and/or punishable by a fine exceeding two hundred thousand (200,000) CFA francs are classified as offences.
Offences punishable by a fine not exceeding two hundred thousand (200,000) CFA francs are classified as contraventions.

CHAPTER 2: THE ATTEMPT

Article 122-1

An attempt consists in the undertaking to commit a crime or an offence, manifested by unequivocal acts tending towards its execution, if those acts were suspended or failed to have their effect only by circumstances independent of the will of their perpetrator.

An attempt is punishable even where the desired result could not be achieved by reason of circumstances unknown to the perpetrator.

Article 122-2

An attempt to commit a crime is always punishable.
An attempt to commit an offence is punishable only in the cases provided for by law. An attempt to commit a contravention is not punishable.

Article 122-3

A preparatory act does not constitute an offence except where otherwise provided by law.

Article 122-4

The penalty applicable to an attempt is that of the offence itself.

TITLE III

CRIMINAL LIABILITY CHAPTER 1: PUNISHABLE PERSONS

Article 131-1

The age of criminal majority is set at eighteen years. It is assessed on the day the acts were committed.
The age of the minor is determined by the production of birth certificates, declaratory judgments or any other documents corroborated by medical expertise. In case of contradiction as to the determination of age, the competent court seized has sovereign discretion.
If the documents produced specify only the year of birth, it shall be considered to have occurred on the thirty-first of December of that year. If the month is specified, the birth shall be considered to have occurred on the last day of that month.

Article 131-2

Any natural person who, personally and in a principal manner, accomplishes the constituent elements of an offence by commission or omission or who is at the origin of such acts is an author or co-author.
Any legal person with a civil, commercial, industrial or financial purpose in whose name and in whose interest acts of execution or abstention constituting an offence have been accomplished by the deliberate will of its organs or representative, in the exercise of their function, is also an author or co-author.

Article 131-3

The State and its subdivisions are also criminally liable for offences committed on their behalf, by their organs or representatives, in the exercise of their function.
Local authorities and their groupings are criminally liable only for offences committed in the exercise of activities that may be the subject of public service delegation agreements.
The criminal liability of legal persons, whether private or public, does not exclude that of natural persons who are authors or accomplices of the same acts, unless the law provides otherwise.

Article 131-4

Any person who is an accomplice to an act qualified as a crime or offence:	anyone who provides weapons, instruments or any other means that were used in the act while knowing that they were to be used for it;	anyone who knowingly prepared or facilitated the consummation of the act, aided or assisted the author or authors of the acts;	anyone who by gift, promise, threat, order, abuse of authority or power provoked the commission of an offence or gave instructions to commit it;
anyone who, knowing the criminal conduct of wrongdoers exercising acts of brigandage or violence against the security of the State, public peace, persons or property, habitually provides them with lodging, a place of retreat or meeting;	anyone who, having knowledge of a crime or offence already attempted or consummated, did not, when it was still possible to prevent or limit its effects or when it could be thought that the guilty parties or one of them would commit new crimes that a denunciation could prevent, immediately notify the administrative or judicial authorities.
Excluded from the cases referred to in dashes 4 and 5 of this article are the spouse, relatives or in-laws of the author of the crime or offence up to and including the fourth degree.

Article 131-5

Accomplices to a crime or offence are punished as the authors of the crime or offence unless the law provides otherwise.

Article 131-6

The authors, co-authors and accomplices of a crime or offence or an attempt to commit a crime or offence are also liable for any other offence whose commission or attempt is a foreseeable consequence of the offence.

Article 131-7

Anyone who causes a non-punishable person to commit an offence is liable to the penalties for the offence committed.

Article 131-8

Anyone who incites the commission of a crime or offence is punished with the penalties provided for the offence even if it was not committed due to the voluntary abstention of the person who was to commit it.

CHAPTER 2: GROUNDS FOR CRIMINAL NON-LIABILITY

Section 1: Justifications Article 132-1

A person who accomplishes an act prescribed or authorized by legislative or regulatory provisions is not criminally liable.
A person who accomplishes an act ordered by legitimate authority is not criminally liable, unless that act is manifestly illegal.

Article 132-2

A person who, faced with an unjustified attack against themselves or others, accomplishes, at the same time, an act commanded by the necessity of self-defence or defence of others, is not criminally liable, unless there is disproportion between the means of defence employed and the seriousness of the attack.
A person who, to interrupt the execution of a crime or offence against property, accomplishes an act of defence, other than voluntary homicide, is not criminally liable when that act is strictly necessary for the purpose pursued provided that the means employed are proportionate to the seriousness of the offence.
Acts committed in the following circumstances are notably commanded by the immediate necessity of self-defence:	to repel, at night, entry by climbing, breaking and entering, violence or ruse into a house, an inhabited apartment or their outbuildings or any other inhabited place;	to defend oneself against the authors of thefts or pillaging executed with violence.

Article 132-3

A person who, faced with a current or imminent danger that threatens themselves, others or property, accomplishes an act necessary for the safeguarding of the person or property, is not criminally liable, unless there is disproportion between the means employed and the seriousness of the threat.

Section 2: Grounds for non-imputability Article 132-4

There is no crime, offence or contravention when the author was in a state of insanity at the time of the act. When the court considers that the mental state of the insane person could compromise public order or the safety of persons, it may order their internment and care in a specialized center. The costs of care are borne in accordance with the health legislation in force.
There is no crime, offence or contravention when the author acted under the influence of a force or constraint that they could not resist.

Article 132-5

A person who was suffering, at the time of the acts, from a psychic or neuropsychic disorder that impaired their judgment or hindered the control of their acts remains punishable; however, the court takes this circumstance into account when it determines the penalty and sets its regime.

Article 132-6

When a public service of the State or a public authority is at the origin of an error of law, a person who proves that they believed, by this error which they were not in a position to avoid, that they could legitimately accomplish the act is not criminally liable.

Article 132-7

The age of criminal responsibility is set at thirteen years.
There is no crime, offence or contravention when the author of the offence was under thirteen years of age on the date the acts were committed.
A minor under thirteen years of age may only be subject to educational and security measures.
Other categories of minors criminally responsible for crimes, offences or contraventions are dealt with under conditions set by a special law that determines the measures of protection, assistance, supervision and education.

Article 132-8

In cases of non-imputability, the courts seized may order all restitutions and pronounce all reparations in accordance with the provisions of the civil code.

BOOK II: PENALTIES, SECURITY MEASURES AND EDUCATIONAL MEASURES

TITLE I: PENALTIES

CHAPTER 1: GENERAL PROVISIONS

Article 211-1

The judge may always impose a firm sentence or a suspended sentence or a mixed sentence.
Suspension consists of a partial or total exemption from execution of a sentence of imprisonment or fine.
Suspension is not applicable to sentences of imprisonment imposed for a duration exceeding five years.
Suspension is revocable under the conditions governed by the code of criminal procedure.
A mixed sentence consists of imposing a sentence of imprisonment or fine of which one part is firm and the other accompanied by suspension.
Conviction to the penalties provided by law is always pronounced without prejudice to restitution and damages that may be owed to the parties.

CHAPTER 2: PENALTIES IN CRIMINAL MATTERS

Section 1: Penalties applicable to adults Article 212-1

Penalties in criminal matters are: life imprisonment; imprisonment for a fixed term; fine for legal persons; dissolution for legal persons.
Criminal penalties do not exclude one or more legally provided complementary penalties or a fine penalty.
The competent jurisdiction may also order the destruction of the thing that was used or intended to commit the offense or of the thing that is the product thereof.

Article 212-2

Conviction to the penalty of imprisonment for a fixed term, in criminal matters, is from more than ten years up to life imprisonment.

Article 212-3

Conviction to a criminal penalty may entail civic degradation.
The civic degradation pronounced runs from the day the conviction became final.

Article 212-4

Civic degradation consists: in the removal and exclusion of convicted persons from all functions, employment or public offices; in the deprivation of the right to vote, eligibility and in general all civic and political rights and the right to wear a decoration;
in the incapacity to be an expert, witness in acts and to testify in court otherwise than to give simple information; in the incapacity to be part of any family council, and to be guardian, curator, deputy guardian or legal adviser, except for one's own children and upon the conforming opinion of the family; in the deprivation of the right to carry weapons, to serve in the national armed forces, to teach or to direct an educational or training establishment, to be employed in an educational institution, as a teacher or supervisor.

Article 212-5

A person convicted to a sentence of life imprisonment may not dispose of his property, in whole or in part, either by inter vivos donation or by will, nor receive it in this capacity, except for maintenance. Any will made by him prior to his adversarial conviction, having become final, is null. The above provisions are not applicable to a person convicted in absentia.
A person convicted to a sentence of life imprisonment may be relieved of all or part of the incapacities contained in the preceding paragraph. He may be granted the exercise, in the place of execution of the sentence, of civil rights or some of these rights, of which he was deprived by his state of legal interdiction. Acts done by the convicted person in the place of execution of the sentence may not encumber the property he possessed on the day of his conviction, or which came to him gratuitously since that time.

Article 212-6

In all cases where a conviction is pronounced for a crime against the external security of the State, committed in time of war, the competent jurisdictions pronounce the confiscation, for the benefit of the nation, of all present property of the convicted person, of whatever nature, movable, immovable, divided or undivided, according to the procedures provided in articles 212-7 and 212-8 below.

Article 212-7

If the convicted person is married, confiscation applies only to the convicted person's share in the division of the community property, or of the undivided property between his spouse and him.
If he has descendants or ascendants, confiscation applies only to the disposable portion. If necessary, division or sale by auction is carried out according to the rules applicable in matters of succession.

Article 212-8

The alienation of confiscated property is pursued by the National Agency for Management and Recovery of Seized or Confiscated Assets in the forms prescribed for the sale of State property.
Property devolved to the State by the effect of confiscation remains encumbered, up to the amount of their value, by legitimate debts prior to the conviction.

Section 2: Penalties applicable to minors Article 212-9

Without prejudice to the application of the provisions of this chapter that are not contrary to this article, a minor over thirteen years of age, found guilty of a crime may be sentenced, by reasoned decision, to a custodial sentence.
When the excuse of minority is retained, the sentence imposed may not exceed half of the sentence provided for adults. In any event, it may not exceed fifteen years.
The measures and sanctions provided in article 213-8 may, where appropriate, be imposed on the minor found guilty of a crime.

CHAPTER 3: PENALTIES IN CORRECTIONAL MATTERS

Section 1: Penalties applicable to adults Article 213-1

Penalties in correctional matters are: imprisonment for a fixed term; fine; community service work; temporary prohibition; permanent prohibition; dissolution for legal persons.
The competent jurisdiction may also order the confiscation and/or destruction of the thing that was used or intended to commit the offense or of the thing that is the product thereof.
In all cases, correctional penalties do not exclude one or more legally provided complementary penalties.

Article 213-2

Dissolution may only be pronounced: when the legal person is legally created; when it concerns a crime or an offense punishable by a sentence of imprisonment greater than or equal to three years for natural persons; when the legal person has been diverted from its purpose to commit the incriminated acts.

Article 213-3

The duration of the sentence of imprisonment, in correctional matters, is at least thirty days and at most ten years, except in cases where the law has determined other limits.
In the sentence of imprisonment, each day counts for twenty-four hours and each month for thirty days.

Article 213-4

Community service work is a penalty that the correctional jurisdiction may impose as a principal penalty when an offense is punishable by a sentence of imprisonment. It consists of having the consenting convicted person perform, for a duration provided by law, unpaid community service work for the benefit of a legal person under public law or a legally recognized non-profit association.
It may not be imposed cumulatively with one of the other penalties provided in article 213-1 above.
Community service work may not be imposed against the accused who refuses it or who is not present at the hearing. The president of the court, before pronouncing the judgment, informs the accused of his right to refuse to perform community service work and receives his response.
The quantum and the procedures for implementing community service work are determined by the law governing the administration of community service work.

Article 213-5

Sentences of community service are expressed in hours or days.
The court that imposes the sentence of community service shall set the period within which the community service must be completed, within a limit of twenty-four months. The period ends upon completion of all the community service; it may be temporarily suspended for serious medical, family, professional or social reasons. This period is suspended during the time the convicted person is placed in pre-trial detention, serves a custodial sentence or fulfills national service obligations.

The terms of execution of the obligation to perform community service and the suspension of the period provided for in the preceding paragraph are decided by the sentence enforcement judge.

Article 213-6

Correctional courts may, in certain cases, prohibit, in whole or in part, the exercise of the following civic, civil and family rights:	the right to vote;	the right to stand for election;	the right to be called or appointed to public functions or positions in the administration, or to exercise such functions or positions;	the right to bear arms;	the right to vote and suffrage in family deliberations;	the right to be a guardian or curator, except in the case of one's own children and only upon the advice of the family;	the right to be an expert or employed as a witness in legal acts;	the right to testify in court, other than to make simple declarations.

Article 213-7

Correctional courts shall only impose the prohibition mentioned in the preceding article when it is authorized or ordered by a specific provision of law.

Section 2: Penalties applicable to minors Article 213-8

Without prejudice to the application of the provisions of this chapter that are not contrary to this article, a minor against whom the commission of an offense is established may be sentenced by reasoned decision to one or more of the following measures:
admonishment;	reprimand;	return to parents, extended family, legal representatives, or a trustworthy person;	placement in an institution, a public or private establishment authorized for education or vocational training;	placement in an institution or a public or private establishment specialized in the reintegration of children in conflict with the law through education or vocational training;	placement in a medical or medico-educational establishment, if necessary.
A minor over the age of thirteen may also be sentenced to a fine or to imprisonment for a fixed term.
A minor over the age of sixteen may be sentenced to community service, under the conditions provided for in this code.

CHAPTER 4: OTHER PENALTIES INCURRED FOR CRIMES AND OFFENSES

Article 214-1

When the law so provides, a legal person, prosecuted for a crime or offense, may, in addition to the principal penalty, be sanctioned with one or more of the following penalties:	the prohibition, permanently or for a period of up to five years, from exercising directly or indirectly one or more professional or social activities;	placement, for a period of up to five years, under judicial supervision;	the permanent closure or closure for a period of up to five years of all establishments or one or more establishments of the enterprise that were used to commit the incriminated acts;
exclusion from public contracts and public service delegations permanently or for a period of up to five years;	the prohibition, permanently or for a period of up to five years, from making a public offer of financial securities or from having its financial securities admitted to trading on a regulated market;	the prohibition, for a period of up to five years, from issuing checks other than those that allow the withdrawal of funds by the drawer from the drawee or those that are certified, or from using payment cards;	the penalty of confiscation of all or part of its property;	publication of the decision rendered, either in the print press, or by any means of communication to the public including electronically, or posting thereof.

Article 214-2

Banishment from residence, fines and special confiscation, either of the corpus delicti when the property belongs to the convicted person, or of things produced by the offense, or of those that were used or intended to commit it, are penalties common to criminal and correctional matters.

Article 214-3

The duration of any custodial sentence runs from the date on which the conviction decision becomes final.

Article 214-4

In the case of a sentence to imprisonment for a fixed term, pre-trial detention is credited day for day against the duration of the sentence imposed by the judgment or conviction order.

Article 214-5

Sentences of imprisonment are served in penitentiary establishments provided for that purpose.

Article 214-6

The prohibition from exercising a public function or a professional or social activity is either permanent or temporary. In the latter case, it may not exceed ten years.
This prohibition does not apply to the exercise of an elective mandate or trade union responsibility. Nor does it apply in matters of press offenses.

Article 214-7

The penalty of exclusion from public contracts and public service delegations entails the prohibition from participating, directly or indirectly, in any contract concluded by the State and its public establishments, territorial authorities, their groupings and their public establishments, as well as by enterprises granted concessions or controlled by the State or by territorial authorities or their groupings.
The penalty of exclusion is permanent or temporary. In the latter case, it may not exceed five years.

Article 214-8

The penalty of closure of an establishment entails the prohibition from exercising the activity in connection with which the offense was committed.

Article 214-9

Anyone who violates the penalty of prohibition from exercising a commercial or industrial profession, from directing, administering, managing or controlling in any capacity, directly or indirectly, on their own account or on behalf of others, a commercial or industrial enterprise or a commercial company, imposed against them, is punished by imprisonment of one to three years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 214-10

Banishment from residence consists of the prohibition imposed on a convicted person from appearing in certain places.

It also includes measures of supervision and assistance.
Its duration is from two to ten years in correctional matters, from eleven to thirty years in criminal matters.
It may be imposed against:	anyone sentenced to imprisonment for a crime;	anyone sentenced for a crime or offense against the internal or external security of the State;	anyone who, having been sentenced to a term of imprisonment exceeding one year, has, within five years after the expiration of that sentence or its prescription, been sentenced to a term equal to or exceeding one year of imprisonment.

Article 214-11

Any person sentenced to life imprisonment who obtains a commutation or remission of sentence is, unless otherwise provided by the clemency decision, subject by operation of law to banishment from residence for five years.
The same applies to any person sentenced to life imprisonment whose sentence is time-barred.

Article 214-12

A ban from the territory may be pronounced for a period greater than or equal to ten years or permanently, against any foreigner guilty of a felony or misdemeanor.
The convicted person is escorted to the border by operation of law, upon expiration of his or her prison sentence, where applicable.

Article 214-13

The list of prohibited places is established by the minister in charge of territorial administration, by individual order issued jointly with the minister in charge of justice.

The same order determines the surveillance and assistance measures to which the convicted person may be subjected.

Article 214-14

The prohibition order is notified to the convicted person who receives, in addition to an anthropometric booklet, the legal identity card. The decisions or orders issued pursuant to Article 214-13 above are also notified to him or her.
If notification of the prohibition order was made to the convicted person before his or her final or conditional release, the prohibition runs from the date of that release. However, in case of revocation of conditional release, the prohibition is suspended during the time of the new incarceration. The same applies in the case of detention for any other cause.
If the prohibition order could not be notified to him or her before his or her release, the convicted person must, at that time, inform the director or chief guard of the penitentiary establishment where he or she was detained of the place where he or she intends to establish his or her residence. He or she is further required, during the three months following his or her release, to notify him of any change of that residence, and to respond to the summons addressed to him or her by the administrative authority for the purpose of notification of the prohibition order.
If he or she complies with these obligations, the prohibition runs from the date of release; otherwise, it takes effect only from the day when notification of the prohibition order could be made to him or her.
If no custodial sentence without suspension has been pronounced or if that sentence has expired, notification of the prohibition order is made to the convicted person as soon as the judgment or decision imposing the residence ban has become final; the prohibition runs from the day when the judgment or decision acquired that character.
In the case of a sentence of life imprisonment, the residence ban takes effect from the day when the prescription period is completed.

Article 214-15

Any person banned from residence who, in violation of the order notified to him or her, appears in a place prohibited to him or her is punished by imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to two million (2,000,000)

CFA francs.
Any person who evades the surveillance measures prescribed by the order notified to him or her, or who fails to respond to the summons addressed to him or her by the administrative authority for the purpose of notification of the prohibition order in the case provided for in paragraph 3 of Article 214-14 above, is punished by the same penalties.

Article 214-16

Joint orders issued by the ministers in charge of justice and territorial administration determine the conditions for application of Articles 214-10, 214-12, and 214-13 above.
They establish, in particular: the surveillance and assistance measures that may be prescribed pursuant to Articles 214-10 and 214-13 above; the conditions for establishment and issuance and the modalities of the documents provided for in Article 214-14, paragraph 1 above; the entries and endorsements to be made on the anthropometric booklet, the form of notifications of the orders provided for in Articles 214-13 and 214-14 and of the summons provided for in Article 214-14 paragraph 3 above.

Article 214-17

In cases specifically provided for by law, the courts seized may order the posting of their decision, the content of which is set in very conspicuous characters, in the places they indicate, at the expense of the convicted person.
Unless otherwise provided by law, such posting is ordered for a period that may not exceed two months in the case of felonies or misdemeanors.
The total or partial removal, concealment and tearing of posters affixed in accordance with this article, carried out voluntarily by the convicted person, at his or her instigation or on his or her orders, are punished by imprisonment of one month to six months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) CFA francs. The posting is carried out again in full at the expense of the convicted person.

The courts seized may order the dissemination of all or part of their decision and determine the newspaper(s) or audiovisual communication service responsible for such dissemination.
The posting or dissemination may include the name of the victim only with his or her consent or that of his or her legal representative.

Article 214-18

If restitution is required, the guilty party may be further condemned, toward the injured party, if the latter so requests, to damages the determination of which is left to the discretion of the court seized.

Article 214-19

The judge, for serious medical, family, professional or social reasons, may decide to allow payment of the fine in installments.
For the same reasons and in the case where the judgment did not provide for it, the same court may, upon application by the convicted person, order payment of the fine in installments.
In case of insufficient assets, restitution and damages owed to the injured party take precedence over the fine.

Article 214-20

Enforcement of sentences to fines and costs owed to the Public Treasury may be pursued by means of imprisonment for debt.

Article 214-21

When fines and costs are pronounced in favor of the State, if, after expiration of the criminal sentence, the imprisonment of the convicted person for payment of these pecuniary sentences has lasted a full year, he or she may, upon proof established by legal means of his or her absolute insolvency, obtain provisional release.
The duration of imprisonment is reduced to six months if it concerns a misdemeanor; subject, in all cases, to resumption of imprisonment for debt if the convicted person acquires any means of solvency.

Article 214-22

All persons convicted of the same felony or the same misdemeanor are jointly and severally liable for fines, restitution, damages and costs.

Article 214-23

The complementary penalty of confiscation is incurred in cases provided for by law or regulation. It is also incurred automatically for crimes and for offences punishable by a term of imprisonment exceeding one year, with the exception of press offences.
Confiscation applies to all movable or immovable property, whatever its nature, divided or undivided, which was used to commit the offence or which was intended to be used to commit it, and of which the convicted person is the owner or, subject to the rights of the owner in good faith, over which he has free disposal.
It also applies to all property which is the object or the direct or indirect proceeds of the offence, with the exception of property capable of being returned to the victim. If the proceeds of the offence have been mixed with funds of lawful origin for the acquisition of one or more properties, confiscation may apply to such property only up to the estimated value of such proceeds.
Confiscation may also apply to any movable or immovable property defined by the law or regulation which punishes the offence.
If it is a crime or an offence punishable by at least five years' imprisonment and having procured a direct or indirect profit, confiscation also applies to movable or immovable property, whatever its nature, divided or undivided, belonging to the convicted person or, subject to the rights of the owner in good faith, over which he has free disposal, when neither the convicted person nor the owner, given the opportunity to explain the property whose confiscation is contemplated, has been able to justify its origin.
When the law which punishes the crime or offence so provides, confiscation may also apply to all or part of the property belonging to the convicted person or, subject to the rights of the owner in good faith, over which he has free disposal, whatever its nature, movable or immovable, divided or undivided.

Confiscation is mandatory for objects classified as dangerous or harmful by law or regulation, or the possession of which is unlawful, whether or not such property is the property of the convicted person.
The complementary penalty of confiscation applies under the same conditions to all incorporeal rights, whatever their nature, divided or undivided.
Confiscation may be ordered by value. Confiscation by value may be executed on all property, whatever its nature, belonging to the convicted person or over which he has free disposal, subject to the rights of the owner in good faith. For the recovery of the sum representing the value of the confiscated thing, the provisions relating to judicial constraint are applicable.
The confiscated thing is, unless a special provision provides for its destruction or allocation, transferred to the State, but it remains encumbered, up to its value, with real rights lawfully created in favour of third parties.
When the confiscated thing is a vehicle which has not been seized or impounded during the proceedings, the convicted person must, upon the injunction given to him by the public prosecutor, hand over this vehicle to the service or body responsible for its destruction or disposal.

CHAPITRE 5 : DES PEINES EN MATIERE CONTRAVENTIONNELLE

Article 215-1

The penalties in matters of contraventions are: the fine; the complementary penalties legally provided for in matters of contraventions.

CHAPITRE 6 : DE LA PERSONNALISATION DES PEINES ET DES CIRCONSTANCES AGGRAVANTES

Article 216-1

Within the limits fixed by law, the court pronounces the penalties and fixes their regime according to the circumstances of the offence and the personality of its perpetrator.
Personal circumstances from which result an exoneration of responsibility, an exemption, a mitigation or an aggravation of penalty have effect only with regard to the person who is the subject thereof.

Article 216-2

Organised gang, assembly, ambush, premeditation, breaking and entering, scaling, use of a weapon, use of a means of cryptology in particular constitute aggravating circumstances in the cases provided for by this code.
The status of spouse, that of father or mother, that of cohabitant, that of child may also constitute aggravating circumstances.
Objective circumstances inherent in the offence which aggravate or diminish penalties have effect with regard to the co-perpetrator or accomplice only if he could foresee them.

Article 216-3

An organised gang within the meaning of the law constitutes any group formed or any agreement established with a view to the preparation, characterised by one or more material facts, of one or more offences.

Article 216-4

An assembly within the meaning of the law constitutes any collective action of at least two persons, occasional or fortuitous, on the occasion of the commission of one or more offences.

Article 216-5

Premeditation consists in the design formed before the action to make an attempt on the person of a determined individual or even of one who will be found or encountered, even though this design may be dependent on some circumstance or some condition.

Article 216-6

Ambush consists in waiting, for a certain time in one or various places, for an individual either to put him to death or to exercise acts of violence on him.

Article 216-7

Breaking and entering consists in the forcing, degradation or destruction of any closing device or any kind of enclosure.
Assimilated to breaking and entering is the use of false keys, keys unduly obtained or any instrument that can be fraudulently used to operate a closing device without forcing or degrading it.

Article 216-8

Scaling is the act of entering any place, either over an element of enclosure or through any opening not intended to serve as an entrance.

Article 216-9

A weapon is any object or device designed or intended to kill, injure, strike, neutralise or to cause incapacity.
Also considered as a weapon for the application of this code, in addition to firearms and objects considered as weapons by the texts in force, any object, instrument, tool or utensil that is cutting, piercing or blunt, hand-held or thrown.
Scissors, pocket knives and simple canes are deemed to be weapons only if they are used to kill, injure, strike or threaten.
Assimilated to a weapon is any object which, presenting with the weapon defined in paragraph 1 a resemblance of a nature to create confusion, is used to threaten to kill or injure or is intended, by the person carrying it, to threaten to kill or injure.
The use of an animal to kill, injure or threaten is assimilated to the use of a weapon.

Article 216-10

A cryptology means is any hardware or software designed or modified to transform data, whether information or signals, using secret conventions or to perform the reverse operation with or without secret conventions.
These cryptology means have as their principal purpose to guarantee the security of data storage or transmission, by enabling their confidentiality, authentication or integrity control to be ensured.
A cryptology service is any operation aimed at implementing, on behalf of others, cryptology means.
When a cryptology means has been used to prepare or commit a crime or offence, or to facilitate its preparation or commission, the maximum custodial sentence incurred is increased as follows:	it is increased to life imprisonment when the offence is punishable by twenty years' imprisonment;	it is increased to twenty years' imprisonment when the offence is punishable by less than twenty years and more than ten years' imprisonment;	it is increased to ten years' imprisonment when the offence is punishable by more than three years and less than ten years' imprisonment;	it is increased to double when the offence is punishable by three years' imprisonment at most.
The provisions of this article are not, however, applicable to the perpetrator or accomplice of the offence who, at the request of the judicial or administrative authorities, has provided them with the plain version of encrypted messages as well as the secret conventions necessary for decryption.

Article 216-11

When it concerns the cases respectively provided for by law or regulation, the penalties incurred for a crime, offence or contravention are aggravated when the offence is committed by the spouse or cohabitant.
The aggravating circumstance provided for in the first paragraph is also constituted when the acts are committed by the former spouse, the former cohabitant. The provisions of this paragraph are applicable where the offence is committed by reason of the relations having existed between the perpetrator of the acts and the victim.
In the cases provided for by law, the penalties incurred for a crime or offence are aggravated when the offence is committed by reason of the membership or non-membership, real or supposed, of the victim in a particular ethnicity, nation, race or religion.
The aggravating circumstance defined in the first paragraph is constituted when the offence is preceded, accompanied or followed by words, writings, images, objects or acts of any nature damaging the honour or consideration of the victim or of a group of persons of which the victim is part by reason of their membership or non-membership, real or supposed, in a particular ethnicity, nation, race or religion.

CHAPITRE 7 : DES EXCUSES ET DES CIRCONSTANCES ATTENUANTES

Article 217-1

No crime or offence may be excused, nor the penalty mitigated, except in the cases and circumstances where the law declares the act excusable or permits a less severe penalty to be applied to it.

Article 217-2

Absolutory excuses ensure impunity for the perpetrator of the offence; however, educational or security measures may be applied to him.
Mitigating excuses ensure for the guilty party a moderation of the penalty. The minority of the perpetrator at the time of the acts is a mitigating excuse.

The court seised of the merits may disregard the excuse of minority for minors aged sixteen years or more.

Article 217-3

When the excuse is admitted by the court seised, the applicable penalties are as follows:	imprisonment of one year to five years, if the penalty incurred is life imprisonment;	imprisonment of six months to two years, if the penalty incurred is imprisonment of five years to ten years or eleven years to twenty-one years;	imprisonment of thirty days to six months, if the penalty incurred is imprisonment of two months to five years.

Article 217-4

Unless otherwise provided by law, if the court seised recognises by reasoned decision mitigating circumstances for the guilty party which, without being excuses, are nevertheless of a nature to mitigate his criminal or delictual responsibility, the penalties are modified as follows:	imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years, if the penalty incurred is life imprisonment;	imprisonment of five years to ten years, if the penalty incurred is imprisonment of eleven to thirty years;	imprisonment of two years to five years, if the penalty incurred is imprisonment of five years to ten years.
In correctional matters, the court which recognises mitigating circumstances is authorised to reduce the imprisonment and the fine even below the penalties for simple police offences.
If the law provides for the cumulative application of imprisonment and a fine, the court may impose both penalties by reducing them or by reducing only one of them. If the law provides for a penalty of imprisonment alone, the court may substitute a fine for it; the substitution fine is five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs.

CHAPITRE 8 : DE LA RECIDIVE

Article 218-1

In the cases limitatively enumerated by law, the penalties incurred for crimes and offences are aggravated in case of recidivism.

Article 218-2

In criminal and delictual matters, is a recidivist anyone who, after having been definitively convicted for a first offence by a national or foreign court, subject to the offence having motivated the conviction abroad also being an offence under national law, commits a second crime or a second offence independent of the first offence.

Article 218-3

May be sentenced to double the penalties provided for the second offence anyone who having:	already been definitively convicted for a crime, commits a new crime;	already been definitively convicted for a crime, commits within the period of five years from the expiry or prescription of the penalty, an intentional offence;	already been definitively convicted for an intentional offence, commits within the period of five years, from the expiry or prescription of the penalty, a crime;	already been definitively convicted for an offence, commits within the period of five years from the expiry or prescription of the penalty, an identical or assimilated offence;
already been definitively convicted for a contravention, commits within the period of one year from the expiry or prescription of the penalty, the same contravention.

Article 218-4

The offences of theft, fraud, breach of trust, abuse of blank signature, receiving stolen goods, misappropriation of public funds or seized objects, extortion of funds, swindling, corruption, extortion, offences relating to cheques and offences in company matters are considered as the same offence from the point of view of recidivism.

Article 218-5

In contravention matters, there is recidivism when a first judgment that has become final has been rendered against the offender in the preceding twelve months.

Article 218-6

In case of concurrence of aggravating circumstances and mitigating circumstances, the rules of mitigating circumstances are applied to the penalty resulting from the aggravating circumstances.
In case of concurrence of mitigating circumstances and a legal excuse, the rules of mitigating circumstances are applied to the penalty resulting from the admission of the excuse.
If mitigating circumstances are admitted for a recidivist, the penalty resulting from the recidivism must first be fixed, before reducing it by reason of the mitigating circumstances.

CHAPTER 9: EXTINCTION AND ERASURE OF PENALTY

Article 219-1

A person who has attempted to commit a crime or an offence is, in cases provided for by law, exempt from penalty if, having notified the administrative or judicial authority, they have made it possible to prevent the commission of the offence and, where applicable, to identify the co-authors or accomplices.

In cases provided for by law, the duration of the custodial sentence incurred by a person who has committed a crime or an offence is reduced if, having notified the administrative or judicial authority, they have made it possible to bring the offence to an end, to prevent the offence from causing harm or to identify the other authors or accomplices.
The provisions of the preceding paragraph are also applicable when the person has made it possible either to prevent the commission of a related offence of the same nature as the crime or offence for which they were prosecuted, or to bring such an offence to an end, to prevent it from causing harm or to identify its authors or accomplices.

Article 219-2

Penalties imposed for a crime are prescribed after twenty full years from the date on which the conviction decision became final, unless the law provides otherwise.

Article 219-3

Penalties imposed for an offence are prescribed after five full years from the date on which the conviction decision became final.

Article 219-4

Penalties imposed for a contravention are prescribed after three full years from the date on which the conviction decision became final.

Article 219-5

Civil obligations arising from a final criminal decision are prescribed according to the rules of the civil code.

Article 219-6

Pardon only entails dispensation from executing the penalty.
Pardon does not prevent the victim's right to obtain reparation for the harm caused by the offence.

Article 219-7

Amnesty erases the convictions pronounced. It entails, without giving rise to restitution, the remission of all penalties. It restores the author or accomplice of the offence to the benefit of the suspended sentence that may have been granted to them upon a previous conviction.
Amnesty does not prejudice the rights of third parties.

Article 219-8

Any person who, in the exercise of their functions, has knowledge of criminal convictions, disciplinary or professional sanctions or prohibitions, disqualifications and incapacities erased by amnesty, is prohibited from recalling their existence in any form whatsoever or from allowing mention of them to remain in any document.
However, the minutes of judgments, rulings and decisions are exempt from this prohibition. Furthermore, amnesty does not prevent the execution of publication ordered by way of reparation.

Article 219-9

Any person subject to a criminal, correctional or contravention penalty may benefit either from automatic rehabilitation under the conditions provided for in this section, or from judicial rehabilitation granted under the conditions provided for by the code of criminal procedure.

Article 219-10

Rehabilitation is automatically acquired by a natural person convicted who has not, within the time limits determined below, incurred any new conviction to a criminal or correctional penalty:	for conviction to a fine after a period of three years from the day of payment of the fine, the expiry of judicial constraint or the completion of prescription;	for a single conviction either to imprisonment not exceeding one year, or to a penalty other than life imprisonment,

fixed-term imprisonment, fine, after a period of five years from either the execution of the penalty or the completion of prescription;	for a single conviction to imprisonment not exceeding ten years or for multiple convictions to imprisonment the total of which does not exceed five years, after a period of ten years from either the expiry of the penalty served or the completion of prescription.
The time limits provided for in this article are doubled when the person has been convicted for acts committed in a state of legal recidivism.
In the case of convictions accompanied in whole or in part by a suspended sentence, the rehabilitation time limits run, for each of these convictions and including in the case of multiple convictions, from the date on which the conviction becomes null and void.

Article 219-11

Rehabilitation is automatically acquired by a legal person convicted who has not, within the time limits determined below, incurred any new conviction to a criminal or correctional penalty:	for conviction to a fine, after a period of five years from the day of payment of the fine or the completion of prescription;	for conviction to a penalty other than a fine or dissolution, after a period of five years from either the execution of the penalty or the completion of prescription.
The time limits provided for in this article are doubled when the person has been convicted for acts committed in a state of legal recidivism.
In the case of a conviction accompanied by a suspended sentence, the rehabilitation time limits run from the date on which the conviction becomes null and void.

Article 219-12

Penalties for which merger has been granted are considered as constituting a single penalty for the application of the provisions of the two preceding articles.

Article 219-13

Rehabilitation produces the same effects as those provided for by the articles relating to amnesty and pardon.
It erases all incapacities and disqualifications resulting from the conviction.
However, when the person has been sentenced to socio-judicial supervision or to the penalty of prohibition from exercising a professional or voluntary activity involving habitual contact with minors, rehabilitation only produces its effects at the end of the measure.
Rehabilitation does not prohibit the taking into account of the conviction, by the judicial authorities alone, in the event of new prosecutions, for the application of the rules on legal recidivism.

TITLE II

SECURITY MEASURES AND EDUCATIONAL MEASURES CHAPTER 1: SECURITY MEASURES

Article 221-1

Security measures are individual coercive measures imposed on individuals dangerous to the social order in order to prevent the offences that their condition makes probable.
The following constitute security measures:	confinement of the insane;	treatment of persons addicted to narcotics;	treatment of dangerous alcoholics;	measures	concerning	certain	persons	suffering	from	mental or neuropsychiatric disorder;	supervised liberty of minors.

CHAPTER 2: EDUCATIONAL MEASURES

Article 222-1

Educational measures are individual measures that aim at education, re-education, guardianship or assistance in favour of the convicted person.
Educational measures are applicable to minors under eighteen years of age found guilty of crimes or offences.
These are:	return of the minor to their family;	placement of the minor with a relative or a trustworthy person;	placement of the minor in a charitable, religious or private institution;	placement of the minor in a specialised public establishment.

BOOK III

CRIMES AND OFFENCES AGAINST THE PUBLIC INTEREST TITLE I: CRIMES AND OFFENCES AGAINST STATE SECURITY CHAPTER 1: TREASON AND ESPIONAGE

Article 311-1

Is guilty of treason and punished by life imprisonment, any Burkinabè who: bears arms against the State; maintains intelligence with a foreign power with a view to inducing it to undertake hostilities against Burkina Faso or provides it with the means to do so, either by facilitating the penetration of foreign forces into Burkinabè territory, or by undermining the loyalty of the armed forces, or in any other manner; delivers to a foreign power or its agents, either troops, or territories, towns, works, posts, stores, arsenals, buildings,

materials, munitions, ships, aircraft or railway locomotives belonging to Burkina Faso or assigned to its defence; with a view to harming national defence, destroys or damages a ship, an aircraft or railway locomotive, material, supplies, construction or any installation whatsoever, or who, with the same aim, introduces into them, either before or after their completion, defects likely to damage them, to prevent them from functioning normally or to cause an accident.

Article 311-2

Is guilty of treason and punished by a sentence of life imprisonment, any Burkinabè who, in time of war: incites military personnel to enter the service of a foreign power or facilitates the means for them to do so; carries out enlistments for a foreign power; maintains intelligence with a foreign power or with an agent, with a view to favouring the enterprises of that foreign power against Burkina Faso; obstructs the movement of military means or materials; knowingly participates in an enterprise of demoralisation of the armed forces or populations having as its object to harm national defence.

Article 311-3

Is guilty of treason and punished by a sentence of life imprisonment any Burkinabè who, with a view to favouring a foreign power, obtains, delivers, destroys or allows to be destroyed in any form or by any means whatsoever any information, object, document or process which must be kept secret in the interest of national defence.

Article 311-4

Is guilty of espionage and punished by a sentence of imprisonment of thirty years, any foreigner or stateless person who commits one of the acts provided for in articles 311-1 and 311-3 above.
Is guilty of espionage and punished by a sentence of life imprisonment, any foreigner or stateless person who commits one of the acts provided for in article 311-2 above.

Article 311-5

Is punished, as a crime, the provocation to commit or the offer to commit one of the crimes referred to in this chapter.

Article 311-6

Is punished, in time of war, by a sentence of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to eight million (8,000,000) CFA francs and in time of peace, by a sentence of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to four million (4,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, having complete knowledge of a plan or date of treason or espionage, as to the nature of which he could not be mistaken, does not report it to the administrative, military or judicial authorities, from the moment he became aware of them.

Article 311-7

Is punished by the same penalties, anyone who, being in contact with an individual exercising an activity likely to harm the security of the State, does not notify the authorities referred to in the preceding article from the moment he was able to become aware of that activity.

Article 311-8

Are exempted from the penalties provided for against the perpetrators of conspiracies or other crimes against the security of the State, those perpetrators who, before any execution or attempted execution of these conspiracies or these crimes and before any proceedings commenced, are the first to give knowledge of them to the government, to the administrative or judicial police authorities or who,

even since the commencement of proceedings, facilitate the arrest of said perpetrators and accomplices.

CHAPTER 2: OTHER OFFENCES AGAINST NATIONAL DEFENCE

Article 312-1

Is punished by life imprisonment, anyone who gathers, with the intention of delivering them to a foreign power, information, objects, documents or processes whose collection and exploitation are likely to harm national defence.

Article 312-2

Is punished by a sentence of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, any guardian, any custodian by function or by capacity of information, an object, document, or process which must be kept secret in the interest of national defence or whose knowledge may lead to the discovery of a national defence secret who, through clumsiness, imprudence, inattention or non-observance of regulations: destroys it, removes it, allows it to be destroyed or removed, reproduces it or allows it to be reproduced; brings it or allows it to be brought to the knowledge of the public or of an unqualified person.

Article 312-3

Is punished by a sentence of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs anyone who, for a purpose other than that of delivering it to a foreign power or its agents: commits one of the offences provided for in article 312-2 above; secures possession of information, an object, document or process kept secret in the interest of national defence or whose knowledge may lead to the discovery of a military secret.

Article 312-4

Is punished by a sentence of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, knowingly and without prior authorisation from the competent authority, delivers or communicates to a person acting on behalf of a foreign power or enterprise, either an invention concerning national defence, or information, studies or manufacturing processes relating to an invention of this kind or to an industrial application concerning national defence.

Article 312-5

Is punished by a sentence of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs anyone who, without intention of treason or espionage, brings to the knowledge of an unqualified person or of the public, information not made public by the competent authority and whose disclosure is manifestly likely to harm national defence.

Article 312-6

Are notably deemed to be national defence secrets for the application of this code: information of a military, diplomatic, economic or industrial nature which, by its nature, must be known only to persons qualified to hold it and must, in the interest of national defence, be kept secret from any other person; objects, materials, writings, drawings, plans, maps, surveys, photographs or other productions and, all other documents whatsoever which, by their nature, must be known only to persons qualified to handle or hold them, and must be kept secret from any other person as being able to lead to the discovery of information belonging to one of the categories referred to above; military information of any nature not made public by the government and not included in the enumerations above whose

publication, dissemination, disclosure or reproduction has been prohibited by a law; information relating either to measures taken to discover and arrest the perpetrators and accomplices of crimes or offences against the external security of the State, or to the progress of prosecutions and investigation, or to debates before the trial court.

Article 312-7

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years, and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who: enters under a disguise or a false name or by concealing their status or nationality into a work, post or arsenal, into the works, camps, bivouacs or cantonments of an army, into a warship or commercial vessel employed by national defence, into a military vehicle, into an establishment or worksite working for national defence; organizes, even without disguise or without concealing their name, status or nationality, in a clandestine manner, any means of correspondence or remote transmission likely to harm national defence; voluntarily overflies Burkinabè territory by means of a foreign aircraft without being authorized to do so by an agreement or by the Burkinabè authority; executes in a prohibited zone fixed by the military authority without authorization from the latter, drawings, photographs, surveys or topographical operations inside or around places, works, posts or establishments of interest to national defence; stays in defiance of a prohibition within a determined radius around the works listed in the preceding points; communicates to an unqualified person or makes public information relating either to measures taken to discover or arrest the perpetrators and accomplices of crimes or offences defined in chapters 1

and 2 of this title, or to the conduct of the proceedings, or to the debates or deliberations before the trial courts.
However, in peacetime, the offences provided for in bullets 3, 4, 5 and 6 of this article are punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs.

Article 312-8

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who: by hostile acts not approved by the competent authority, exposes Burkina Faso to a declaration of war or to reprisals; by acts not approved by the competent authority, exposes Burkinabè to suffer reprisals; maintains with the agents of a foreign power intelligence likely to harm the military or diplomatic situation of Burkina Faso or its essential economic interests.

Article 312-9

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, in time of war, directly or through an intermediary and in defiance of enacted prohibitions, engages in acts of commerce or maintains correspondence or relations that may harm national defence with subjects or agents of an enemy power.

Article 312-10

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, in peacetime, obstructs the movement of military means or materials or by any means whatsoever, provokes, facilitates or organizes a violent or concerted action with a view to harming national defence.

Article 312-11

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, in peacetime, knowingly participates in an enterprise of demoralization of the Armed Forces likely to harm national defence.

Article 312-12

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, in peacetime, in Burkina Faso and clandestinely, enlists or trains with a view to their enlistment persons called to bear arms on behalf of a foreign power or organized group.

Article 312-13

The attempt of the offences provided for in this section is punishable.

CHAPITRE 3

DES	ATTENTATS,	DES	COMPLOTS	ET	AUTRES INFRACTIONS CONTRE LA SURETE DE L'ÉTAT

Article 313-1

There is a conspiracy as soon as the resolution to act is concerted and settled between two or more persons with a view to: changing the legal regime by violence; inciting the populations to arm themselves against the legal authority of the State or to arm themselves against one another; undermining the integrity of the national territory; organizing massacre and devastation.
The applicable penalty is imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years.

Article 313-2

A conspiracy followed by an act committed or begun to prepare its execution is an attack punished by imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years.

Article 313-3

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who makes an unagreed proposal to form a conspiracy to commit one of the crimes provided for in article 313-1 above.

Article 313-4

In all cases, the court seized may in addition pronounce the deprivation of civil rights for a period that may not exceed five years.

Article 313-5

Is punished by life imprisonment, anyone who, without having been legally invested or who, without legitimate reason, takes any military command whatsoever or who, against the order of the legitimate authority, retains such command.
Commanders who keep their army or troop assembled after disbandment or separation has been ordered, are punished by the same penalty.

Article 313-6

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, in time of war, being able to dispose of the public force, requisitions or orders, causes to be requisitioned or ordered the action or use thereof to prevent the execution of texts on military recruitment or on mobilization.
If this requisition or this order is carried out, the offender is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years.
Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years, and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, anyone who, in peacetime, being able to dispose of the public force requisitions or orders, causes to be requisitioned or ordered the action or use thereof to prevent the execution of texts on military recruitment or on mobilization.

If this requisition or this order is carried out, the offender is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.

CHAPITRE 4 : DES CRIMES COMMIS PAR LA PARTICIPATION A UN MOUVEMENT DE DESTABILISATION

Article 314-1

Are punished by imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, those who, in an insurrectionary movement: are found carrying weapons and ammunition; occupy or attempt to occupy public buildings or private properties; erect barricades; oppose by violence and threats the convening or assembly of the public force; provoke or facilitate the gathering of insurgents by flags, rallying signs or any other means; intercept or attempt to intercept communications between the depositaries of the public force; break or attempt to break communication and telecommunication lines; seize weapons and ammunition by violence, or threat, pillage, disarmament of agents of the public force.
Are punished by life imprisonment, those who use their firearms.

Article 314-2

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs,

anyone who sets fire to or destroys by explosive device buildings, warehouses, arsenals or other properties belonging to the State.
If death has resulted, the perpetrator is punished by a term of life imprisonment.

Article 314-3

Is punished by a term of life imprisonment, anyone who, whether to invade domains or properties of the State, towns, posts, warehouses, arsenals, or to plunder and share public funds, public or national properties or those of a community, or to make attack or resistance against the public force acting against the perpetrators of these crimes, places himself at the head of armed bands or exercises therein any command function whatsoever.
The same penalty applies to those who direct the association, raise or cause to be raised, organize or cause to be organized the bands or provide or procure for them knowingly arms, ammunition and instruments of crime or send convoys of supplies or practice in any other manner intelligence with the leaders of the bands.

Article 314-4

In the case where one or more of the crimes mentioned in this section have been executed or simply attempted by a band, life imprisonment applies to all individuals forming part of the band and who have been seized at the place of the seditious assembly.
Is punished by the same penalty, although not seized at the place, anyone who has directed the sedition or has exercised in the band any command whatsoever.

Article 314-5

No penalty is pronounced for act of sedition against those who, having formed part of these bands without exercising a command therein, withdraw at the first warning of the civil, military authorities or even those who have been seized outside the places of the seditious assembly without offering resistance and without arms.

CHAPITRE 5 : DES ATTROUPEMENTS

Article 315-1

Are prohibited, the formation of armed assemblies on the public highway as well as unarmed assemblies which are of a nature to disturb the public tranquility.
The assembly is deemed armed when several of the individuals who compose it are carrying apparent or concealed weapons or when a single one of these individuals, carrying apparent weapons, is not immediately expelled from the assembly by those very persons who form part of it.

Article 315-2

All persons who form assemblies in squares or on the public highway are required to disperse at the summons or summonses of the authorities responsible for maintaining order.
If the assembly does not disperse, the summons is renewed twice.
If the three summonses have remained without effect or even in the case where after a first summons or a second, it is not possible to make the second or the third, force may be employed.

Article 315-3

The public force may be employed without summonses:	if violence or acts of force are exercised against the forces of order;	if the forces of order cannot otherwise defend the ground they occupy or the persons and posts of which they have custody.

Article 315-4

Anyone who having formed part of an armed assembly which disperses upon the customary summonses, is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs.

If the assembly is formed at night, the term of imprisonment is one year to three years and the fine five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.
Nevertheless, no penalty is pronounced for assembly against those who, having formed part of it without being personally armed, withdraw upon the first summons.

Article 315-5

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs anyone who forms part of an armed assembly which disperses only after employment of the public force.
The term of imprisonment is five years to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to four million (4,000,000) CFA francs, if the armed assembly has been dispersed only after the public force has made use of its weapons.

Article 315-6

The aggravation of penalties provided for in article 315-5 above is not applicable to unarmed individuals forming part of an armed assembly, in the case of concealed weapons, except when they have had knowledge of the presence in the assembly of several persons carrying these weapons.
Those who have not had this knowledge incur the penalties provided for in article 315-4 above.

Article 315-7

In the cases provided for in article 315-5 above, the court seized may in addition pronounce the prohibition from exercising civil rights for a duration which cannot exceed five years.

Article 315-8

Is punished as the crime or the offense according to the distinctions established in the preceding articles, any provocation followed by effect, to an armed or unarmed assembly

by speeches uttered publicly or by writings or printed matter posted or distributed.
Printers, engravers, lithographers, bill-posters and distributors are punished as accomplices, when they act knowingly.
Provocation not followed by effect is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to six months.

Article 315-9

Prosecutions brought for crimes and offense of assembly do not constitute an obstacle to the prosecution of crimes and offenses which are committed in the midst of these assemblies.

Article 315-10

In all cases, the confiscation of weapons and ammunition must be pronounced.

CHAPITRE 6 : DES ARMES ET MUNITIONS

Article 316-1

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, without legally required authorization, manufactures, exports, imports, possesses, transfers, sells or purchases a firearm or ammunition or acts as an intermediary in the sale or purchase or is responsible for the transport, transit on the territory of Burkina Faso or transhipment of a firearm or ammunition.

Article 316-2

Is considered as an accomplice anyone who lends a firearm or ammunition to a person without ensuring that the latter is authorized to possess a firearm or ammunition.

Article 316-3

In all cases, the confiscation of the weapon or ammunition is mandatory.
In case of recidivism, the court may pronounce the closure of the incriminated establishment either temporarily for a duration which cannot exceed five years, or definitively.

Article 316-4

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to six months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, anyone who, even having an authorization to carry a weapon, carries a weapon in a place open to the public and in conditions likely to disturb the public peace and to intimidate others.

TITRE II : DES CRIMES ET DELITS CONTRE LA CONSTITUTION ET LES LIBERTES PUBLIQUES

CHAPITRE 1 : DE LA HAUTE TRAHISON ET DE L'ATTENTAT A LA CONSTITUTION

Article 321-1

There is high treason when the President of the Faso violates his oath, performs acts contrary to the dignity of his office, is author, co-author or accomplice of serious and flagrant violations of human rights or of cession of a part of the national territory.
High treason is punished by life imprisonment.

Article 321-2

Constitutes an attack on the Constitution any conduct violating the Constitution and its principles or any failure, in serious contravention of democratic and republican values.
An attack on the Constitution is punished by a term of imprisonment of twenty-one years to thirty years and a fine of one hundred million (100,000,000) to five hundred million (500,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 321-3

The statute of limitations cannot be invoked by the person prosecuted when it is established that by virtue of the functions they have held, they were able to influence the course of prosecutions or prevent any prosecution against them.

CHAPITRE 2

OFFENCES OF A RACIAL, REGIONALIST, RELIGIOUS, SEXIST OR CASTE NATURE

Article 322-1

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs and a residence ban of five years any act of discrimination, any manifestation contrary to freedom of conscience and freedom of worship likely to set persons against one another.

Article 322-2

Is considered an act of discrimination, any distinction, exclusion, restriction, or preference based on race, ethnicity, colour, sex, language, religion, political opinion or any other opinion, national or social origin, fortune, birth which has the purpose or effect of destroying or compromising the recognition, enjoyment or exercise, under conditions of equality, of human rights and fundamental freedoms in the political, economic, social and cultural fields or in any other field of public life.

Article 322-3

Discrimination is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to three years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, when it consists of:	refusing to provide a good or service;	hindering the normal exercise of any economic activity;	refusing to hire, sanctioning or dismissing a person;	making any service or benefit conditional upon a condition based on discrimination.

Article 322-4

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to three years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs any public speech or writing that justifies or purports to justify any discrimination as referred to in Article 322-2 above, any hatred, any intolerance or violence for any reason whatsoever towards a person or group of persons.
If such speeches or writings have resulted in violence against persons and/or destruction of property, the penalty is three years to ten years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.
The court seized may, in addition, order the confiscation of the media containing such writings or speeches.

Article 322-5

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs non-public incitement to discrimination as referred to in Article 322-2 above, to intolerance, hatred or violence for any reason whatsoever towards a person or group of persons.

CHAPITRE 3: CRIMES AND OFFENCES RELATING TO THE EXERCISE OF CIVIC RIGHTS

Article 323-1

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to two years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, anyone who, by unlawful assembly, assault or threat, prevents one or more persons from exercising their civic rights.

Article 323-2

The penalty is imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, if the acts are committed pursuant to a concerted plan to be executed either on the national territory or in one or more administrative entities.

CHAPITRE 4: ATTACKS ON LIBERTY

Article 324-1

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, any public agent or any other representative of authority who orders or causes to be ordered any arbitrary act or attack either on individual liberty, or on the civic rights of one or more persons, or on the texts in force. If they justify that they acted by lawful order of their superiors and within the limits of competence for matters within the jurisdiction of the latter, they are exempt from penalty, which, in this case, is applied only to the superiors who gave the order.

Article 324-2

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of five million (5,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, any minister who orders or commits the acts mentioned in Article 324-1 above and who refuses or neglects to cause such acts to cease.

Article 324-3

If the minister accused of having ordered or authorized the act contrary to the texts claims that the signature imputed to them was obtained by deception, they are required, while causing the act to cease, to denounce the person they declare to be the author of the deception, otherwise, they are prosecuted personally and are liable to the penalty provided for in Article 324-2 above.

Article 324-4

The offences provided for in Article 324-1 above may give rise to payment of damages which may not be less than ten thousand (10,000) CFA francs per day of unlawful detention and per person.

Article 324-5

Are punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of five million (5,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, if the act contrary to the texts in force is done using a false signature of the name of the minister or of a public official, the perpetrators of the forgery and those who knowingly make use of it.

Article 324-6

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, any official or public agent responsible for administrative or judicial police who, having knowledge of facts of unlawful or arbitrary detention in any place, refuses or neglects to record them and to cause them to cease.

Article 324-7

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, any person in charge of places of detention who:	receives a person without a warrant or judgment or without an order from the government in case of expulsion or extradition;	detains them or refuses to present them to the judicial police officer or to the bearer of their orders;	refuses to exhibit the registers to any authority responsible for inspecting them.

Article 324-8

Are punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years:	public prosecutors, prosecutors of Faso, their deputies, judges or judicial police officers who detain or cause to be detained a person outside the places and outside the conditions determined by law;	public prosecutors, prosecutors of Faso, their deputies and judges who bring or try a person before a criminal court without them having been previously and lawfully prosecuted.

CHAPITRE 5: COALITION OF PUBLIC AGENTS

Article 325-1

Are punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to five years, depositaries of public authority who, either by assembly of individuals or bodies, or by delegation or correspondence between them, concert measures contrary to the law.

Article 325-2

If by one of the means expressed above, measures are concerted against the execution of laws or against the orders of the government, the author or authors are punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years.
The court seized may in addition pronounce a residence ban for a duration which may not exceed five years.
If this concertation takes place between the civil authorities and the military or security corps or their leaders, the authors or instigators are punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years.
If the concertation had as its object or result a conspiracy threatening the security of the State, the authors are punished by imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years.

CHAPITRE 6

MALFEASANCE AND ENCROACHMENT BY ADMINISTRATIVE, LEGISLATIVE AND JUDICIAL AUTHORITIES

Article 326-1

Any crime committed by a public agent in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of his functions is malfeasance.
Any act of malfeasance is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs when the law has not provided for a higher penalty.
Misdemeanors and petty offenses committed by the public agent in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of his functions do not constitute malfeasance.

Article 326-2

Are punished for malfeasance by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs:	counselors, judges, prosecutors general, prosecutors of Faso, their deputies, judicial police officers who intentionally interfere in the exercise of legislative power either by regulations containing legislative provisions, or by stopping or suspending the execution of one or more laws, or by deliberating on the question of whether laws will be published or executed;	counselors, judges, prosecutors general, prosecutors of Faso, their deputies, judicial police officers who intentionally exceed their powers by interfering in matters attributed to administrative authorities, either by making regulations on these matters, or by prohibiting the execution of orders emanating from the administration or who, having permitted or ordered the summoning of administrators by reason of the exercise of their functions, persist in the execution of their judgments or orders notwithstanding the annulment that may have been pronounced or the conflict that may have been notified to them.

Article 326-3

Are punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, ministers, mayors and all administrative authorities acting in their official capacity, who intentionally interfere in the exercise of legislative power or who adopt general texts tending to give orders or prohibitions of any kind to courts and tribunals.
Are also punished by the same penalties deputies or any other persons enjoying legislative power who intentionally interfere in the exercise of judicial power or who intentionally adopt general texts tending to give orders or prohibitions of any kind to courts or tribunals.

Article 326-4

Are punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to five million (5,000,000) francs, administrative authorities who encroach upon judicial functions or unduly assume jurisdiction over private rights and interests within the jurisdiction of the tribunals and who after the claim of the parties or one of them, nevertheless decide the matter before the authority responsible for settling the conflict has ruled.

TITRE III

CORRUPTION AND RELATED OFFENSES CHAPITRE 1: CORRUPTION OF PUBLIC AGENTS

Article 331-1

For the purposes of this title, the following terms mean: Public official:
• any civilian or military person who holds a legislative, executive, administrative or judicial mandate, whether appointed or elected, on a permanent or temporary basis, whether remunerated or not and regardless of their hierarchical level or seniority;
• any other civilian or military person vested with a function or mandate, even temporarily, remunerated or not, who contributes, in that capacity, to the service of a public body or public enterprise, or any other enterprise in which the State holds all or part of its capital, or any other enterprise that provides a public service;
• the agent of any legal person under private law responsible for the execution of a public service or public procurement regardless of the modalities of the mission entrusted to them;
• any other civilian or military person defined as a public official or assimilated thereto in accordance with the legislation and regulations in force;
foreign public official: any civilian or military person who holds a legislative, executive, administrative or judicial mandate with a foreign country, whether appointed or elected; and any civilian or military person who exercises a public function for a foreign country, including for a public body or public enterprise; enrichment balance sheet: the statement of movable and immovable acquisitions during a given period balanced against the legal income obtained or legal means mobilized that enabled these acquisitions; property: all types of assets, corporeal or incorporeal, movable or immovable, tangible or intangible, as well as legal instruments or documents attesting to the ownership of these assets or the rights relating thereto; gift: a present, an object given to a person with the intention of pleasing them; confiscation: the permanent deprivation of property by decision of a judicial body or any other competent authority; conflict of interest: any situation of interference between a public interest and public or private interests that is likely to influence or appear to influence the independent, impartial and objective exercise of a function; Convention: the United Nations Convention against Corruption; donation: the act of voluntarily transferring something to a person without asking for anything in exchange; entity: an organized set of corporeal or incorporeal elements or natural or legal persons, pursuing its own objective; official of a public international organization: any international official or any person authorized by such an organization to act on its behalf; freezing or seizure: the temporary prohibition of the transfer, conversion, disposition or movement of property, or the temporary assumption of custody or control of property by decision of a court or other competent authority;
conventional hospitality: any disinterested act generally accepted in social relations and falling within the customs of society; predicate offence: any offence as a result of which proceeds are generated that may become the subject of money laundering in accordance with the applicable legislation relating thereto; controlled delivery: the method of allowing the exit from the national territory, passage through the territory or entry into the territory of illicit or suspected illicit shipments, with the knowledge and under the control of the competent authorities, in order to investigate an offence and identify the persons involved in its commission; assets: all movable and immovable property, rights and claims belonging to the declarant and related persons but also the debts and financial commitments contracted by the latter; related person: any person related to the declarant by the bonds of marriage, de facto union, filiation or adoption, with the exception of adult children. proceeds of crime: any property derived, directly or indirectly, from the commission of an offence or obtained, directly or indirectly, by committing it. misuse of the single-source or direct agreement procedure: exceeding the quota set by WAEMU regulations and awarding more than one contract by the single-source or direct agreement procedure either to a natural or legal person, or to close relatives up to the 4th degree in the direct line and the 5th in the collateral line in the same year.

Article 331-2

Is punishable by a term of imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine equal to twice the value of the promises accepted, undue advantages or things received or requested, provided that said fine is not less than two million (2,000,000) CFA francs: anyone who promises, offers or grants to a public official, directly or indirectly, an undue advantage, either for himself or for another

person or entity, so that he performs or refrains from performing an act in the exercise of his functions; any public official who solicits or accepts, directly or indirectly, an undue advantage, for himself or for another person or entity, in order to perform or refrain from performing an act within his functions.

CHAPTER 2: RELATED OFFENCES

Section 1: Unjustified advantages and corruption in public procurement

Article 332-1

Is punishable by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs: any public official who enters into, endorses or revises a contract, agreement, public procurement or amendment in violation of the legislative and regulatory provisions in force in order to procure an unjustified advantage for another; any merchant, industrialist, artist or artisan, private sector entrepreneur or in general, any natural or legal person who enters into, even occasionally, a contract or public procurement with the State, territorial authorities, public law establishments or bodies and State companies by taking advantage of the authority or influence of the agents of the aforementioned bodies to increase the prices they normally and habitually charge or to modify, to their advantage, the quality of goods or services or the delivery or supply deadlines.

Article 332-2

Is punishable by the penalties provided for in Article 332-1 above, anyone who compels or attempts to compel by force or threats, corrupts or attempts to corrupt by promise, offer, donation or present, a public official, whether or not the attempt was followed by effect.

Article 332-3

Is punishable by a term of imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine equivalent to three times the amount or value of the advantage received or to be received, any public official who, on the occasion of the preparation, negotiation, conclusion or execution of a public procurement, contract or amendment concluded in the name of the State or territorial authorities, public establishments of the State or State companies, receives or attempts to receive, directly or indirectly, for his benefit or for the benefit of a third party, remuneration or an advantage of any nature whatsoever from a private contractor.

Article 332-4

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine equivalent to twice the promises accepted, undue advantages, things received or requested of the value of a public contract and a prohibition from bidding on public contracts for two years, any natural or legal person contracting with the State or local authorities, public establishments of the State or State-owned companies who grants or proposes remuneration or any advantage by himself or through an intermediary to a public official with a view to obtaining a public contract.

Article 332-5

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to three years and a fine equivalent to twice the promises accepted, undue advantages, things received or requested, of the value of the public contract, any public official who abusively resorts to the direct agreement procedure in a public contract concluded in the name of the State or local authorities, public establishments of the State or State-owned companies.

Section 2

Corruption of foreign public officials and officials of public international organizations

Article 332-6

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs: anyone who promises, offers or grants to a foreign public official or an official of a public international organization, directly or indirectly, an undue advantage, for himself or for another person or entity, so that he performs or refrains from performing an act in the exercise of his functions, with a view to obtaining or retaining a public contract or an undue advantage in connection with international trade or otherwise; any foreign public official or official of a public international organization who solicits or accepts, directly or indirectly, an undue advantage, for himself or for another person or entity, in order to perform or refrain from performing an act within his functions.

Section 3: Misappropriation of property by a public official Article 332-7

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs any public official who misappropriates, destroys or dissipates for his own benefit or for the benefit of another person or entity, any property, any funds or securities, public or private, or anything of value that have been entrusted to him either by virtue of a contract or by reason of his functions.

Section 4

Unlawful and abusive use and retention of public property by a public official

Article 332-8

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) francs

CFA, any public official who knowingly and unduly retains for his own benefit or for the benefit of another person or entity, any property, any public funds or securities, or anything of value that have been entrusted to him either by virtue of a contract or by reason of his functions, or who makes unlawful and abusive use of public property.

Section 5: Extortion Article 332-9

Any public official who solicits, receives, demands or orders the collection of what he knows is not due or exceeds what is due, either to himself, or to the administration, or to the parties for whom he collects, is punished: by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine equal to twice the proceeds of the offense if the value is less than or equal to five hundred thousand (500,000) francs, provided that this fine may not be less than two million (2,000,000) CFA francs; by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine equal to twice the value of the proceeds of the offense if the latter exceeds five hundred thousand (500,000) CFA francs provided that this fine may not be less than ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.

Section 6: Unlawful exemptions and franchises Article 332-10

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of two to ten times the value of the property or right compromised, any agent of the State who, for whatever reason, unlawfully grants exemptions or franchises from taxes, duties, fines, bonds and other rights or gives free of charge or sells at a low price, public property in violation of laws and regulations.

Section 7: Influence peddling and abuse of function Article 332-11

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs: anyone who promises, offers or grants to a public official or any other person, directly or indirectly, an undue advantage, so that said official or said person uses his real or supposed influence with a view to obtaining from an administration or a public authority, an undue advantage for the initial instigator of the act or for any other person; any public official or any other person who solicits, accepts directly or indirectly, an undue advantage for himself or for another person, in order to use his real or supposed influence with a view to obtaining from an administration or a public authority an undue advantage.

Article 332-12

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, the act, for a public official, of intentionally abusing his functions or his position, by performing or refraining from performing, in the exercise of his functions, an act in violation of laws and regulations in order to obtain an undue advantage for himself or for another person or entity.

Section 8: Overbilling Article 332-13

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of three years to five years, confiscation of the amount received as a rebate and a fine equivalent to three times the value received provided that this fine may not be less than two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, without prejudice to the sanctions provided for by the regulations on public contracts, any public official who proceeds or causes to proceed with the billing, for an amount higher than its actual cost, of a good or service to be acquired by an entity of the national or local public administration.

Section 9: Nepotism and favoritism Article 332-14

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to three years and prohibition from exercising a function in the national public administration for a period of five years, any political figure, any public official, any member of the defense and security forces who uses his function or uses his influence, to procure directly or indirectly any undue material advantage, or employment, to a member of his family in the direct line or in the collateral line up to the third degree.

Article 332-15

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to one year and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs, any official of the administrative or judicial order, any military person or equivalent, any agent or representative of the administration, any person vested with an elective mandate, who procures or attempts to procure for another an unjustified advantage by an act contrary to legislative or regulatory provisions intended to guarantee equal access and equality of candidates in public employment and public contracts.

Section 10: Incompatible trade Article 332-16

Any public agent engaging in commercial or lucrative activities other than the marketing of their non-industrial agro-pastoral, literary, scientific and artistic productions is punished by imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs.
In addition, confiscation of the means of such trade or lucrative activity shall be ordered.

Section 11: Misappropriation of public property Article 332-17

Anyone who misappropriates or dissipates for personal purposes public funds, active effects in lieu thereof, payment instruments, securities, acts containing or creating obligations or discharge, equipment or movable objects belonging to, intended for or entrusted to the State, local authorities or public institutions, organizations or companies benefiting from State participation, which they hold by reason of their functions, is guilty of misappropriation of public property:	if the value of the misappropriation is less than or equal to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, the penalty is imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine equal to three times the value of the misappropriated property without such fine being less than one million (1,000,000) CFA francs;	if the value is greater than one million (1,000,000) CFA francs and less than or equal to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, the penalty is imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine equal to three times the value of the misappropriated property without such fine being less than five million (5,000,000) CFA francs;	if the value is greater than ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, the penalty is imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine equal to three times the value of the misappropriated property without such fine being less than ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.
In the cases provided for in bullets 2 and 3 of this article, the court may also order the prohibition from exercising civil rights for a period not exceeding five years.

Section 12: Conflict of interest and unlawful taking of interest Article 332-18

Any public agent whose private interests coincide with the public interest and are

likely to influence the normal exercise of their functions, who does not inform their hierarchical superior, is punished by imprisonment of six months to two years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 332-19

Any public agent who, either directly, indirectly or by simulated act, takes, receives or retains any interest whatsoever in acts, awards, tenders, enterprises of which they have, at the time of the act in whole or in part, the administration or supervision or, who, having the mission to order payment or to settle an affair, has taken any interest therein, is punished by imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 332-20

Any public agent responsible by reason of their function for:	the supervision and control of a private enterprise;	the conclusion, on behalf of the State or public authorities, of contracts or agreements of any nature or with a private enterprise;	the expression of opinions on contracts or agreements of any nature with a private enterprise, who, during a period of five years from the cessation of the function, exercises a corporate mandate or remunerated activity, except with express authorization from the competent administrative authority, or takes or receives a capital participation, except by hereditary devolution, either in any of the enterprises referred to above, or in any enterprise possessing with one of them at least thirty percent common capital, or in any enterprise having concluded with one of them a contract involving exclusivity in law or in fact, is punished by imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 332-21

The provisions of articles 332-19 and 332-20 above also apply to agents of public institutions, nationalized enterprises and mixed economy companies in which the State or public authorities

hold directly or indirectly at least twenty-five percent of the capital.

Section 13: Unlawful simulation Article 332-22

Any person from the private sector who agrees to represent a public agent, acquires property or engages in commercial or lucrative activities on their behalf pursuant to a written or verbal nominee agreement is punished by imprisonment of six months to five years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs.
The public agent, party to such nominee agreement, is punished by the same penalties, notwithstanding the administrative and disciplinary sanctions to which they may be subject.
In addition, the court orders ex officio the confiscation of the property and income that are the subject of the offense.

Section 14: Offense of appearance Article 332-23

Anyone who cannot reasonably justify the increase in their standard of living beyond a threshold set by regulation in relation to their lawful income is punished by imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine of five million (5,000,000) to twenty-five million (25,000,000) CFA francs.
The trial court orders the confiscation of the unjustified portion of the assets.
Anyone who has knowingly contributed by any means whatsoever to concealing the illicit nature of the property at the origin of the standard of living referred to in this article incurs the same penalty prescribed for the offense of receiving provided for in article 334-2 below.
The offense of appearance, as referred to, is a continuing offense characterized by the possession of illicit property or their use in a direct or indirect manner.

Section 15: Illicit enrichment Article 332-24

Anyone who has enriched themselves by using funds, equipment, instruments, acts, objects, effects or any other means belonging to the State is punished by the penalties of imprisonment provided for in article 332-17.

Section 16: Insider trading offense Article 332-25

Any agent of the public or private sector who exploits, in anticipation, knowingly, information not known to the public of a nature to break equality of opportunity or which would influence the course of any economic activity and of which they became aware by virtue of their situation or position is punished by imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to twenty million (20,000,000) CFA francs which may go up to ten times the value of the profit realized.
The court orders ex officio the confiscation of the property and income that are the subject of the offense.

Section 17: Failure to declare or false declaration of interest or assets

Article 332-26

Any public agent legally subject to a declaration of interest and assets who, two months after a written formal notice from the institution responsible for combating corruption, knowingly, does not make a declaration of their assets or makes an incomplete, inaccurate or false declaration or knowingly formulates false observations or deliberately violates the obligations imposed upon them by law is punished by imprisonment of six months to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.

Section 18: Disclosure of information Article 332-27

Any agent of the authority holding declarations of interest and assets or of the registry offices found guilty of having disclosed, except in cases provided for by law, in any manner whatsoever, totally or partially, declarations of interest and assets or observations received, is punished by imprisonment of one year to three years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.

Section 19: Offence of acceptance of undue gifts Article 332-28

Any public agent who accepts from a person a gift or any undue advantage likely to influence the handling of a procedure or transaction in progress related to his or her duties or having a connection with such handling or transaction, is punished by imprisonment of six months to two years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.
The donor is punished by the same penalties.

Section 20: Secret financing of political parties Article 332-29

Any political party official who receives secret financing for the benefit of his or her party is punished by imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, without prejudice to the criminal provisions in force relating to the financing of political parties.
Any person who secretly finances a political party is punished by the same penalties.

CHAPTER 3

CORRUPTION AND MISAPPROPRIATION OF PROPERTY IN THE PRIVATE SECTOR, PROHIBITED EMPLOYMENT

Article 333-1

The following are punished by imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine equal to three times the value of the advantage or thing promised, offered or granted without being less than two million (2,000,000) CFA francs: anyone who promises, offers or grants, directly or indirectly, an undue advantage to any person who directs a private sector entity or works for such an entity, in any capacity whatsoever, for himself or herself or for another person, in order that he or she perform or refrain from performing an act in violation of his or her duties; any person directing a private sector entity or working for such an entity, in any capacity whatsoever, who solicits or accepts, directly or indirectly, an undue advantage, for himself or herself or for another person or entity in order that he or she perform or refrain from performing an act in violation of his or her duties.

Article 333-2

Any person who directs a private sector entity or works for such an entity, in any capacity whatsoever, and who, intentionally, in the context of economic, financial or commercial activities, misappropriates any property or any private funds or securities or any other thing of value entrusted to him or her by reason of his or her duties, is punished by imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine equivalent to three times the value of the property or funds misappropriated without being less than two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 333-3

Any public agent, entrusted by the State with a mission of control, supervision, administration or advice of a private enterprise, who exercises less than five years after cessation of his or her duties, a corporate office or remunerated

activity in that enterprise except with express authorization from the competent administrative authority, is punished by imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs.

CHAPTER 4

LAUNDERING OF PROCEEDS OF CRIME AND RECEIVING PROCEEDS OF CORRUPTION AND RELATED OFFENCES

Article 334-1

Laundering of the proceeds of crimes provided for in this chapter is punished by the penalties provided for by the legislation on laundering.

Article 334-2

Any person who, knowingly, receives in whole or in part, the proceeds obtained by means of one of the offences provided for in this title, is punished by imprisonment of three years to five years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.

CHAPTER 5: MISCELLANEOUS PROVISIONS

Section 1: Rules relating to penalties and limitation Article 335-1

If the perpetrator of one or more offences provided for in this title is a magistrate, civil servant exercising a senior function of the State, public officer, member of the superior authority responsible for combating corruption, officer, judicial police officer or having judicial police prerogatives or registry clerk, he or she incurs imprisonment of five years to ten years together with the fine provided for the offence committed.

Article 335-2

Any person who is the perpetrator or accomplice of one or more offences provided for in this chapter, who, before any prosecution, reveals an offence to the administrative or judicial authorities or to the relevant bodies and enables the identification of the persons implicated, benefits from an absolute excuse under the conditions provided for by this criminal code.

Except in the case provided for in the preceding paragraph, the maximum penalty incurred by any person who is the perpetrator or accomplice of one of the offences provided for in this chapter, who, after the commencement of prosecution, facilitates the arrest of one or more other persons involved, is reduced by half.

Article 335-3

In the event of conviction for one or more offences provided for in this title, the court may impose one or more of the following additional penalties: prohibition from exercising civil rights for a period that may not exceed five years; prohibition from exercising public functions or employment for a period that may not exceed five years; prohibition from obtaining any distinction or decoration awarded by the State or its subdivisions.

Article 335-4

Illicit revenues and property arising from one or more offences provided for in chapters 1 to 4 of title III of book III of this code may be seized or frozen by court decision or order of the competent authority.
In the event of conviction, the court orders, subject to cases of restitution of assets or the rights of third parties in good faith, the confiscation of illicit revenues and property for the benefit of the Public Treasury.
The court further orders the confiscation of misappropriated property or the value of the interest or gain obtained, even if such property has already been transferred to the ascendants, descendants, collaterals, spouse and relatives by marriage of the convicted person, whether they have remained in their state or converted into any other value.

Article 335-5

Public prosecution and penalties relating to the offences provided for in chapters 1 to 4 of title III of book III of this code are not subject to limitation when the proceeds of crime are transferred outside the national territory.

Section 2: Provisions relating to denunciations Article 335-6

Any person who, by virtue of his or her function or profession, permanent or temporary, has knowledge of one or more offences provided for in chapters 1 to 4 of title III of book III of this code, and does not inform the competent public authorities in time, is punished by imprisonment of six months to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.
However, any person who brings the information to the attention of private anti-corruption organizations benefits from an absolute excuse.

Article 335-7

Is punished by imprisonment from six months to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who has knowingly, and by any means whatsoever, made a slanderous or abusive denunciation of the offences provided for in chapters 1 to 4 of title III of book III of this code, to the competent authorities, against one or more persons.

Section 3 : Protection of witnesses, experts, whistleblowers and victims

Article 335-8

No person may be excluded from a recruitment procedure or from access to an internship or a training period in a company, no employee may be sanctioned, dismissed or subjected to discriminatory measures, direct or indirect, particularly with regard to remuneration, training, reclassification, assignment, qualification, classification, professional promotion, transfer or contract renewal for having reported or testified, either to their employer or to the judicial or administrative authorities, about one of the offences provided for in chapters 1 to 4 of title III of book III of this code of which they became aware in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of their functions.

Article 335-9

Is punished by imprisonment from six months to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, any person who resorts to physical or moral violence, revenge, intimidation or threat in any form whatsoever and in any manner whatsoever, against the person of witnesses, experts, whistleblowers or victims or their relatives or other persons close to them.
Is punished by the same penalties, any person who reveals the identity or address of a witness who has benefited from the protection provisions provided for by article 335-8 above.

CHAPITRE 6 : ELECTORAL FRAUD

Article 336-1

Is punished by a term of imprisonment from one month to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs anyone who registers under a false name or false capacity or by registering has concealed an incapacity provided for by law or fraudulently registers on more than one list.
Is punished by the same penalties, anyone who obtains a false certificate of registration or removal from the electoral rolls. Is punished by the same penalties, anyone who has contravened the provisions relating to sponsorship.

Article 336-2

Is punished by a term of imprisonment from one to three months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs anyone who, deprived of the right to vote, either following a judicial conviction or following a bankruptcy not followed by rehabilitation, has voted either by virtue of a registration on the lists prior to their deprivation, or by virtue of a subsequent registration, carried out with their complicity.

Article 336-3

Is punished by a term of imprisonment from six months to two years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, anyone who has voted during an electoral consultation, either by virtue of a registration obtained in the cases provided for by article 336-1 above, or by falsely taking the names and capacities of a registered voter.

Article 336-4

Is punished by the penalties provided for in article 336-1 above, any citizen who has taken advantage of multiple registration to vote more than once.
The same penalties are applied to anyone who has prevented, by wilful non-observance of the law, the registration on an electoral list of a citizen fulfilling the conditions set by the electoral law.

Article 336-5

Is punished by a term of imprisonment from six months to two years, a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs and deprivation of the right to vote and to be eligible, for at least five years and at most ten years, anyone who, being responsible in a ballot for receiving, counting or examining the ballots containing the votes of citizens, has removed, added or altered ballots, or has deliberately read a name other than that written.
Any failure to comply with one of the obligations prescribed in articles 86 and 96 of the law establishing the electoral code by a member of the polling station is equivalent to a violation of the ballot and subject to the sanctions provided for in paragraph 1 of this article.

Article 336-6

Is punished by a term of imprisonment from six months to two years, a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs and deprivation of the right to vote and to be eligible for at least five years and at most ten years, anyone who, by gatherings, clamours or threatening demonstrations, has disrupted the operations of an electoral consultation, infringed upon the exercise of the electoral right or the freedom of the vote.

Article 336-7

Is punished by a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, anyone who participates in an electoral consultation with a concealed weapon.
The penalty is imprisonment from one to three months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, when the weapon is visible.

Article 336-8

Notwithstanding the provisions of this code regarding defamation and insult, any candidate or activist of political parties or formations who uses defamation, insults or any act of provocation that may taint the morality and serenity of the electoral campaign is punished by two or both of the following penalties:	imprisonment from one month to one year;	a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs;	deprivation of civil rights for at least two years and at most five years.

Article 336-9

Is punished by a term of imprisonment from one year to five years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, anyone who breaks into a polling station, when the break-in is completed or attempted with violence.
If the perpetrators are carrying weapons, or if the ballot has been violated, the penalty is imprisonment from five years to ten years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs.

Article 336-10

Is punished by a term of imprisonment from one month to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, anyone who, present at the voting place, has committed acts of violence,

threats or behaviour likely to disturb public order and tranquillity, to delay or prevent electoral operations.
If the ballot has been violated, the term of imprisonment is from one year to five years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs.
The penalty is imprisonment from five years to ten years and a fine of six hundred thousand (600,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, in cases where the offences provided for in paragraph 1 have been committed pursuant to a concerted plan to be executed in one or more electoral constituencies.

Article 336-11

Is punished by a term of imprisonment from one year to five years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who removes a ballot box containing the votes cast and not yet counted.
If this removal was carried out by a group, with or without violence, the term of imprisonment is from five years to ten years and the fine from six hundred thousand (600,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 336-12

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of six hundred thousand (600,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, the violation of the ballot, either by members of the polling station, or by agents of the authority, assigned to guard the ballots not yet counted.

Article 336-13

The conviction, if it is pronounced, cannot, in any case, have the effect of annulling the election declared valid by the competent authorities or become final, by the absence of any regular protest formulated within the time limits provided by the laws in force.

Article 336-14

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one month to two years, and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, whoever, either by assault, violence or threats against a voter, or by making him fear losing his employment or exposing his person, his family or his fortune to damage, has determined him or has attempted to determine him to abstain from voting or has influenced his vote.

Article 336-15

Outside the cases specifically provided for by the provisions of the laws and regulations in force, is punished by a term of imprisonment of one month to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, whoever, either in an administrative commission, or in a polling station or in the offices of town halls, prefectures or outside of these, before during or after the ballot, has, by any fraudulent acts, violated or attempted to undermine the sincerity, prevented or attempted to prevent the operations of the ballot or who has changed or attempted to change the result.
The perpetrator may in addition be deprived of his civil rights for at least two years and at most five years.

Article 336-16

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one month to three months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, whoever has distributed or caused to be distributed on the day of the ballot voting papers and other electoral campaign documents.
The court seized, orders, in addition, the confiscation of voting papers and all other electoral campaign documents.

Article 336-17

The public action and the civil action brought pursuant to articles 336-1 to 336-19 of this law are prescribed after six months, from the day of the proclamation of the result of the election.

Article 336-18

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to two years, a fine of five million (5,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs and the deprivation of civil rights for five years whoever is guilty of acts qualified as corruption or electoral fraud notably by:	fraudulent registration on the electoral rolls;	alteration of indelible ink in order to vote several times;	transfer and transport of voters to register on an electoral roll or to vote;	transfer of populations from one polling station to another;	lack of transparency in the use of resources that the State makes available to political parties for electoral campaigns;	falsification of electoral results.
Is punished by the same penalties whoever offers to electoral actors notably members of polling stations or scrutineers promises, gifts or advantages of any nature whatsoever.

Article 336-19

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to two years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs whoever proceeds to:	the use of attributes, goods or means of the State, like those of a public legal entity, an institution or a public body notably a company, an office, a State project and an international institution for electoral purposes;	advertising practices of a political nature;	media coverage of any disguised electoral campaign;	the distribution of leaflets, the posting of posters or the accomplishment of any act of electoral propaganda outside the places and time reserved for this propaganda.

TITRE IV

DE L'ABUS D'AUTORITÉ, DES ENTRAVES À L'EXERCICE DE LA JUSTICE ET DES DÉLITS RELATIFS À LA TENUE DE L'ÉTAT CIVIL

CHAPITRE 1 : DES ATTEINTES A L'AUTORITE DE LA JUSTICE

Section 1 : De l'entrave au bon fonctionnement de la justice Article 341-1

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs:	whoever resorts to physical force, threats or intimidation or promises, offers or grants an undue advantage to obtain false testimony or prevent testimony or the presentation of evidence in a proceeding in connection with the offences established in accordance with chapters 1 to 4 of title III of book III of this code;	whoever resorts to physical force, threats or intimidation to obstruct the course of investigations in connection with the commission of offences established in accordance with chapters 1 to 4 of title III of book III of this code.

Section 2

De la protection des témoins, des experts, des dénonciateurs et des victimes

Article 341-2

No person may be excluded from a recruitment procedure or from access to an internship or a training period in a company, no employee may be sanctioned, dismissed or be the subject of a discriminatory measure, direct or indirect, notably in matters of remuneration, training, reclassification, assignment, qualification, classification, professional promotion, transfer or contract renewal for having reported or testified, either to his employer, or to judicial or administrative authorities, of facts qualified as an offence within the meaning of this chapter of which he would have had knowledge in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of his functions.

Article 341-3

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, whoever resorts to physical or moral violence, vengeance, intimidation or threat in any form whatsoever and in any manner whatsoever, against the person of witnesses, experts, whistleblowers or victims or their relatives or other persons who are close to them.
Is punished by the same penalties, whoever reveals the identity or address of a witness having benefited from the protection provisions provided for by this chapter.

Section 3

De la dénonciation calomnieuse ou abusive de corruption ou d'actes de corruption

Article 341-4

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, whoever has knowingly, and by any means whatsoever, made a slanderous or abusive denunciation of the offences provided for by this chapter, to the competent authorities, against one or more persons.

Section 4 : De la non dénonciation des infractions Article 341-5

Is punished by imprisonment of six months to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, whoever, by virtue of his function or profession, permanent or temporary, has knowledge of one or more offences provided for in this chapter, and does not inform the competent public authorities in time.
However, benefits from an absolute excuse the person who, for any reasons whatsoever, brings the information to the knowledge of private anti-corruption organizations.

Section 5: Abuse of authority and other obstructions to the exercise of justice

Article 341-6

The act, by a person holding public authority or charged with a public service mission, acting in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of their functions or mission, of entering or attempting to enter the home of another against their will outside the cases provided for by law, is punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to two years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs.

Article 341-7

Any civil servant, public officer, administrator, agent or employee of the administration or police, any executor of judicial warrants or judgments, any commander in chief or subordinate commander of the public force who, without legitimate reason, uses or causes to be used violence against persons in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of their functions, is punished according to the nature and gravity of such violence following the rule set out in Article 344-1 of this law.

Article 341-8

Any suppression, any opening of letters or parcels entrusted to the postal service, committed or facilitated by a civil servant or agent assigned to the postal administration, is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to ten years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs.
The court shall further pronounce against the convicted person a prohibition from any public employment or function for a period that may not exceed five years.

Article 341-9

The act, by a magistrate or any other person sitting in a judicial formation, of denying to

render justice after having been requested to do so and persisting in such denial after warning or injunction from their superiors, is punished by a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs and prohibition from the exercise of public functions for a period of two months to five years.

Article 341-10

A witness who alleges an excuse recognized as false is punished by a term of imprisonment of one month to three months, in addition to fines pronounced for non-appearance.

Article 341-11

The act, by any person, of using threats, violence or committing any other act of intimidation to obtain from a magistrate, any person sitting in a judicial formation or participating in the public service of justice, or an agent of detection or prosecution services for offences in a foreign State or in an international court, that they perform or refrain from performing an act of their function, their mission or facilitated by their function or mission, is punished by a term of imprisonment of two years to ten years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 341-12

Any civil servant, agent or employee of the administration who requests or orders, causes to be requested or ordered the action or use of public force against the execution of an order, a judicial warrant or any other order emanating from legitimate authority, is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years.

Article 341-13

If as a result of said orders or requisitions, acts punishable by penalties stronger than those referred to in the preceding articles occur, these stronger penalties are applied to the civil servants, agents or employees guilty of having given said orders or made said requisitions.

Article 341-14

Any commander of internal security forces legally served with a requisition

from the authorized authority who refuses their services or refrains from causing the forces under their command to act, is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to two years.

Section 6: Obstructions to judicial measures for the protection of minors

Article 341-15

If an incident relating to supervised liberty reveals a characterized lack of supervision on the part of the parents or guardian or custodian or systematic obstructions to the exercise of the supervision mission, the children's judge establishes an incident report which they send to the prosecutor of Faso, who refers the matter to the competent court.
Any person who commits the offence provided for in paragraph 1 of this article is punished by a term of one month to two months imprisonment and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 341-16

If on the occasion of the execution of a measure taken by a juvenile court in application of paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of Article 116 of Law No. 015-2014/AN of 13 May 2014 on the protection of children in conflict with the law or in danger, an incident reveals a characterized lack of supervision on the part of the parents, legal representatives of the child or systematic obstructions to the exercise of the social worker's mission, the children's judge establishes an incident report which they send to the prosecutor of Faso, who refers the matter to the competent court.
Any person who commits the offence provided for in the first paragraph of this article is punished by a term of one month to two months imprisonment and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 341-17

If on the occasion of the execution of a measure taken by a juvenile court in application of Article 120 of Law No. 015-2014/AN of 13 May 2014 on the protection of children in conflict with the law or in danger, an incident reveals a characterized lack of supervision on the part of the parents, legal representatives or systematic obstructions to the exercise of the mission

of the social worker responsible for child protection, the children's judge establishes an incident report which they send to the prosecutor of Faso, who refers the matter to the competent court.
Any person who commits the offence provided for in paragraph 1 of this article is punished by a term of one month to two months imprisonment and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.

CHAPTER 2

OFFENCES RELATING TO THE KEEPING OF CIVIL STATUS RECORDS AND TO ASSOCIATIONS

Article 342-1

The civil status officer or the person delegated by them by virtue of legal provisions, who records these acts elsewhere than in the register intended for that purpose or who omits to record them therein, is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) CFA francs.

Article 342-2

The civil status officer or the person delegated by them by virtue of legal provisions, who celebrates a marriage in violation of the conditions prescribed by law, is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) CFA francs.

Article 342-3

The provisions of Articles 342-1 and 342-2 above are applicable even where the nullity of the civil status records has not been requested or has been cured.

Article 342-4

Any person who contravenes the legislative and regulatory provisions on the conditions for the formation and declaration of associations is punished by a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs and in case of recidivism by a double fine.
The founders or leaders of associations who maintain themselves or who reconstitute them illegally after publication of the regulatory text of dissolution, as well as persons who, by propaganda, speeches, writings or by any other means, perpetuate or attempt to perpetuate the dissolved association, are punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million five hundred thousand

(1,500,000) CFA francs.

Article 342-5

Any person who, in any capacity whatsoever, assumes or continues to assume the administration of an association notwithstanding the refusal or withdrawal of the declaration receipt or recognition of public utility or the finding of nullity, is punished by imprisonment of one month to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 342-6

Any person who does not comply with the injunctions of the competent authority aimed at the recognition of an association or who gives false information, assumes or continues to assume the administration of foreign associations or establishments operating without authorization, is punished by imprisonment of six months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.
The same penalties apply to the leaders and participants in the activity of associations or establishments that operate without observing the conditions imposed by the authorization text or beyond the duration fixed by the latter.

CHAPITRE 3 : DE L'EXERCICE ILLEGAL DE L'AUTORITE PUBLIQUE

Article 343-1

Any official subject to oath who enters into the exercise of his functions without having taken the oath is punished by a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 343-2

Any person invested with an administrative mandate, or any public official dismissed, removed from office, suspended, legally prohibited who, after having had official knowledge thereof, continues the exercise of his functions or who, invested with elective or temporary functions, exercises them after having been replaced or after his functions have ended, is punished by imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of six hundred thousand (600,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.
The convicted person is further prohibited from any public employment or function for a period that may not exceed five years, all without prejudice to the heavier penalties imposed against the commanders referred to in Article 313-5 of this law.

CHAPITRE 4 : DISPOSITION PARTICULIERE

Article 344-1

Except in cases where the law specifically regulates the penalties incurred for crimes and offences committed by public or military officials or officers, those among them who participate in other crimes or offences that they were responsible for monitoring or suppressing are punished as follows:	by the maximum penalty, if it is an offence;	by imprisonment of eleven to thirty years, if the crime carries against any other perpetrator the penalty of imprisonment of more than ten years.

TITRE V : DES CRIMES ET DELITS COMMIS PAR LES PARTICULIERS CONTRE L'ORDRE PUBLIC

CHAPITRE 1 : DES ATTEINTES AU DRAPEAU ET AUX SYMBOLES DE LA NATION

Article 351-1

The act, during a demonstration organized or regulated by public authority, of publicly insulting the national anthem or the national flag is punished by imprisonment of two months to two years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs.
The penalty is imprisonment of six months to three years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, when the insult is committed in a gathering.

Article 351-2

Except in the cases provided for by Article 351-1 above, the following acts, when committed under conditions likely to disturb public order and with the intention of insulting the national flag, are punished by imprisonment of two months to two years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs:	destroying it, damaging it or using it in a degrading manner, in a public place or place open to the public;	for the perpetrator of such acts, even committed in a private place, disseminating or causing to be disseminated the recording of images relating to their commission.
In case of recidivism, the penalty is imprisonment of four months to four years and a fine that may not be less than double the fine imposed upon the first conviction.

CHAPITRE 2 : DES OUTRAGES CONTRE LES DEPOSITAIRES DE L'AUTORITE PUBLIQUE

Article 352-1

Insult by gestures, threats, sending of objects, drawings, writings, words or cries uttered against the Head of State or a foreign Head of State is punished by imprisonment of three months to one year and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.
When the insult is uttered against a president of an Institution, a member of the government, of a foreign government, a deputy or a diplomatic agent, the penalty is imprisonment of one month to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 352-2

Insult by words, gestures or threats, by writings or images of any nature not made public or by sending any objects addressed to a magistrate, an assessor or any person sitting in a judicial formation in the exercise of his functions or on the occasion of that exercise and tending to harm his honour, his dignity or the respect due to the function with which he is invested, is punished by imprisonment of six months to three years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.
If the insult takes place at a hearing of a court, a tribunal or a judicial formation, the penalty of imprisonment is increased to one year to ten years and the fine to five hundred thousand (500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.
When the insult is perpetrated before the perpetrator had knowledge of the quality of the magistrate, the penalty of imprisonment is three months to one year and the fine two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs.

Article 352-3

The act of seeking to bring discredit, publicly by acts, words, writings or images of any nature, upon a judicial act or decision, under conditions likely to harm the authority of justice or its independence, is punished by imprisonment of six months to one year and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.
The same penalties apply to the deliberate refusal to execute a judicial decision.
The provisions of paragraph 1 do not apply to acts, words, writings or images of any nature aimed at the reform, cassation or revision of a decision, nor to technical commentaries.
When the offences provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article are committed by lawyers, notaries, bailiffs, court clerks or other auxiliaries of justice, the penalty of imprisonment is six months to two years.

When the offence is committed through the written or audiovisual press, the particular provisions of the laws governing these matters apply with regard to the determination of the persons responsible.

Article 352-4

Insult by words, gestures, threats, writings or drawings not made public or by sending any objects, tending to harm their honour or propriety and targeting any ministerial officer or any commander or agent of the public force, any sworn agent in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of his functions, is punished by imprisonment of one month to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 352-5

In all cases, the offender may also be ordered to make reparation, either at the first hearing or in writing, and the term of imprisonment imposed against him is counted only from the day on which the reparation takes place. When the insult is publicly perpetrated, the maximum penalties provided for are imposed.

Article 352-6

The following cannot give rise to prosecutions for insults: parliamentary debates; speeches during electoral campaigns without imputation of fact concerning strictly private life; judicial debates; pronouncements or writings produced before the courts; the faithful and good faith account of these debates and speeches with the exception of defamation proceedings; the publication of judicial decisions including those rendered in defamation matters;
the official report made in good faith by a person duly designated to conduct an inquiry and within the framework of that inquiry; the imputation made in good faith by a superior or his subordinate; information given in good faith about a person or a third party who has a personal or official interest in knowing it or who has the power to remedy an alleged injustice; criticism of a work, a performance, an opinion of any kind publicly expressed provided that such criticism does not constitute a personal attack.

Article 352-7

For the offences provided for in this chapter, the public prosecution is barred after three full months from the commission of the offence or from the day of the last act of prosecution or investigation.

CHAPITRE 3 : DES VIOLENCES ENVERS LES DEPOSITAIRES DE L'AUTORITE PUBLIQUE

Article 353-1

Is punished by a term of imprisonment from one year to ten years and a fine from three hundred thousand (300,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, even without weapons and without resulting in injuries, commits violence or assault on a magistrate, an assessor, or any person sitting in a judicial formation in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of his functions.
The maximum penalties are always imposed if the assault or violence takes place at the hearing or within the precincts of a court or tribunal.
The court seized may also impose the prohibition from exercising civil rights, the prohibition from residing as well as from exercising any public employment for a period which may not exceed five years.

Article 353-2

Are punished by a term of imprisonment from six months to three years and a fine from two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, violence or assault of the type provided for in Article 353-1 above, directed against a public service agent, if they take place in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of his functions.

Article 353-3

If the violence or assault committed against the officials and agents designated in Articles 353-1 and 353-2 above has caused an incapacity for work equal to twenty-one days or more, the penalty is imprisonment from five years to ten years.
If death has resulted, the penalty is imprisonment from eleven years to thirty years.

Article 353-4

In cases where such violence or assault has not caused bloodshed, injuries or illness, the perpetrators are punished by a term of imprisonment from five years to ten years.
If the violence or assault was committed with premeditation or ambush and has caused bloodshed, injuries or illness, the perpetrators are punished by a term of imprisonment from eleven years to twenty years.

Article 353-5

Is punished by a term of life imprisonment, if the blows were struck or the injuries inflicted on officials or agents designated in Articles 353-1 and 353-2 above in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of their functions with the intention of causing death.

CHAPITRE 4

DE LA DEGRADATION DES MONUMENTS, DES ACTES DE VANDALISME ET DES MANIFESTATIONS ILLICITES

Section 1 : De la dégradation de monuments Article 354-1

Is punished by a term of imprisonment from two months to two years and a fine from two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, anyone who voluntarily destroys, mutilates or degrades: either monuments, statues, paintings or other objects intended for public utility or decoration and erected or placed by the public authority or with its authorization; or monuments, statues, paintings or other objects of art of any kind placed in museums, places reserved for worship or other buildings open to the public; or monuments, sites, paintings or other natural objects registered or classified as national heritage.

Section 2 : Des actes de vandalisme Article 354-2

The act of vandalism is the act of damaging, destroying, degrading or voluntarily deteriorating property belonging to another during demonstrations on the public highway.
Vandalism is punished by a term of imprisonment from one year to three years and a fine from three hundred thousand (300,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 354-3

The offence of act of vandalism applies: to acts of vandalism as provided for in the following article; to the organizers of unlawful demonstrations on the public highway, during which acts of vandalism have been committed;
to the perpetrators and accomplices of acts of vandalism; to persons who enter a demonstration even if lawful, with the intention of committing or having other participants commit acts of vandalism.

Article 354-4

The following acts committed during demonstrations on the public highway constitute acts of vandalism: destruction or damage caused to property, movable or immovable, private or public; destruction of registers, minutes or acts of the public authority.

Section 3 : Des manifestations licites et illicites Article 354-5

A demonstration is lawful when the organizers have made a declaration thereof to the competent administrative authority under the conditions provided for by the laws and regulations in force relating to freedom of assembly and demonstration on the public highway.

Article 354-6

For the purposes of this section, a demonstration is unlawful when: the organizers have not taken the precaution of making a declaration thereof to the competent administrative authority under the conditions provided for by law; the demonstration has been prohibited by the competent administrative authority after the declaration has been made to it; the organizers have made an incomplete or inaccurate declaration of a nature to mislead as to the object or conditions of the planned demonstration.

Article 354-7

The organizers of an unlawful demonstration as defined in Article 354-6 above are liable to penalties of imprisonment from six months to two years

and a fine from three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.
The penalty is imprisonment from two months to one year and a fine from two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs for persons who have voluntarily participated therein.

Article 354-8

Where, as a result of an unlawful demonstration or one prohibited by the administrative police authority, acts of vandalism have been committed, the following are punished by a sentence: of imprisonment from one year to four years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs for the organizers of that demonstration who did not give the order to disperse as soon as they became aware of such violence or assault, destruction or damage; of imprisonment from six months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs for persons who continue to participate actively in that demonstration after the commencement of and with knowledge of the violence, assault, destruction or damage.

Article 354-9

Persons found guilty of one of the offences referred to in this chapter are jointly and severally liable for civil reparations.

CHAPITRE 5

BREAKING OF SEALS AND REMOVAL OF ITEMS FROM PUBLIC DEPOSITORIES

Article 355-1

Any person who intentionally breaks or attempts to break seals or is an accomplice thereto is punished by a sentence of imprisonment from one year to five years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.

If it is the custodian himself who breaks or attempts to break seals or is an accomplice thereto, the sentence of imprisonment is from two years to five years and the fine from one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 355-2

Where seals affixed either by administrative order or pursuant to a court order have been broken, the negligent custodian is punished by a sentence of imprisonment from two months to six months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs.

Article 355-3

Any theft committed by means of breaking seals is punished by a sentence of imprisonment from five years to ten years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.
Any theft of a seal is punished by the same sentence.

Article 355-4

Any person who removes, destroys or takes away, outside the cases provided for by law, procedural documents or other documents, registers, deeds and effects contained in archives, court registries or public depositories or entrusted to a public depositary in that capacity is punished by a sentence of imprisonment from one year to five years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 355-5

Where the offence provided for in Article 355-4 above has been facilitated by the negligence of court clerks, archivists and other public depositaries, they are punished by a sentence of imprisonment from two months to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs.

Article 355-6

If the act is the work of the depositary himself, he is punished by a sentence of imprisonment from five years to ten years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 355-7

If the breaking of seals, the removal, taking away or destruction of the seal or of the item kept in a public depository has been committed with violence against persons, the sentence is imprisonment from eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs without prejudice to other convictions in respect of the violence.

CHAPITRE 6

OFFENCES RELATING TO BURIALS, SEPULCHRES AND VIOLATION OF RESPECT DUE TO THE DEAD

Article 356-1

Any person who: violates the integrity of a corpse by any means whatsoever; commits a violation or desecration, by any means whatsoever, of tombs, sepulchres, cinerary urns or monuments erected in memory of the dead is punished by a sentence of imprisonment from one year to five years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.
Any person who, without a permit issued by the civil registrar, causes a deceased person to be buried is punished by a sentence of imprisonment from two months to six months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs.
The same sentences are pronounced against those who contravene in any manner whatsoever the legislative and regulatory provisions relating to burials.

Article 356-2

The offences defined in Article 356-1 above are punished by a sentence of imprisonment from three years to ten years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs where they have been committed by reason of the membership or non-membership, true or

supposed, of the deceased persons in a particular ethnic group, nation, race or religion.

Article 356-3

Any person who conceals the corpse of a victim of homicide or who died as a result of assault and battery is punished by a sentence of imprisonment from one year to three years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.
Any person who retains without lawful reason in his possession the corpse of a person is also punished by the same sentence.

Article 356-4

Any person who is guilty of mutilation of a corpse is punished by a sentence of imprisonment from one year to five years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.
If the mutilations made were for the purpose of trafficking or trade in bones or any other part of the human body, the sentence of imprisonment is from five years to ten years.

CHAPITRE 7: OFFENCES AGAINST THE ENVIRONMENT

Article 357-1

Any person who, through inattention, carelessness or negligence, has harmed the health of humans, animals or plants by altering either the balance of the natural environment or the essential qualities of the soil, water or air is punished by a sentence of imprisonment from six months to five years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 357-2

Any person who involuntarily destroys, degrades or damages woods, forests, heathlands, scrublands, plantations, fields or reforestation by the effect of an

explosion, a fire or any other means caused by failure to comply with an obligation of prudence or safety imposed by law or regulation is punished by a sentence of imprisonment from one year to five years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.
The same sentences are applicable where the offence described above has resulted in the death of wild animals.
The sentence is imprisonment from one year to six years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs if it concerns fully protected wild animals.
In the case of deliberate violation of an obligation of prudence or safety provided for by law or regulation, the sentences incurred are increased to imprisonment from one year to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.
In the latter case, the offence is punished by the same sentences where it has resulted in the death of wild animals.
The sentence is imprisonment from three years to seven years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs if it concerns fully protected wild animals.
The attempt is punished by the same sentences.

Article 357-3

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to seven years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who voluntarily destroys, degrades or deteriorates woods, forests, heaths, scrubland, plantations, fields or reforestation by the effect of an explosion, a fire or any other means. The same penalties are applicable when the offence has resulted in the death of wild animals.
The term of imprisonment is five years to ten years and the fine from one million (1,000,000) to fifteen million (15,000,000) CFA francs, if the offence has caused irreversible damage to the environment.
The same penalties are applicable when the offence has resulted in the death of fully protected wild animals.
The attempt of the offences provided for in this article is punishable.

CHAPITRE 8 : DES AUTRES ATTEINTES A L'ORDRE PUBLIC

Section 1

Des infractions à la réglementation des maisons de jeux et des loteries non autorisées par la loi

Article 358-1

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to two years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, without authorization and in a public place or place open to the public: operates a house of games of chance; operates devices whose operation is essentially based on chance and which are intended to provide a gain for a stake; organizes lotteries, bets or raffles.
In all cases, the funds or effects that are found exposed, the furniture, instruments, devices used and the movable objects with which the premises are furnished or decorated are confiscated for the benefit of the public treasury.
Raffles and games organized for charitable purposes on the occasion of regular declared events are authorized by right.

Article 358-2

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs anyone who derives his subsistence from practicing or facilitating on the public highway, in a public place or place open to the public, the exercise of illicit games.

Section 2 : Des délits des fournisseurs des forces armées Article 358-3

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, all without prejudice to heavier penalties in case of intelligence with the enemy, anyone charged, as a member of a company, with supplies,

enterprises or administrations on behalf of the armed forces, who, without having been compelled by force majeure, does not fulfill his obligations.
The same penalties are applicable to agents of suppliers when the cessation of service results from their act.

Article 358-4

When public officials or agents appointed or salaried by the government assist the perpetrators in causing the service to fail, the penalty is increased to the maximum without prejudice to heavier penalties in case of intelligence with the enemy.

Article 358-5

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, even though the service has not failed, anyone who through his negligence, delays deliveries or works or who commits fraud on the nature, quality or quantity of works, labor or things supplied.

Article 358-6

The offences provided for in this section may only be prosecuted upon denunciation by the government.

Section 3

Des infractions relatives à l'industrie, au commerce et aux enchères publiques

Article 358-7

Is punished by a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs and the confiscation of goods, anyone who commits a violation of the regulations relating to products intended for export and which has the purpose of guaranteeing their good quality, their nature, their quantity and their dimensions.

Article 358-8

Is guilty of illicit speculation and punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to three years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to twenty million (20,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, directly or through an intermediary, operates or attempts to operate the artificial increase or decrease of prices of foodstuffs, goods or public or private securities by: false or slanderous news or information knowingly spread among the public; offers thrown on the market with the intention of disturbing prices; offers of prices higher than what the sellers are asking; any fraudulent ways or means whatsoever; or by exercising or attempting to exercise either individually or by meeting or coalition, an action on the market with the aim of procuring a gain that would not be the result of the natural play of supply and demand.

Article 358-9

The perpetrator is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of five million (5,000,000) to thirty million (30,000,000) CFA francs, when the increase or decrease has been operated or attempted on grains, flours, farinaceous substances, foodstuffs, beverages, pharmaceutical products, fuels or commercial fertilizers.
The term of imprisonment is ten years and the fine fifty million (50,000,000) CFA francs, if the speculation relates to foodstuffs or goods not falling within the usual exercise of the profession of the perpetrator of the offence.

Article 358-10

Is prohibited any advertising made in bad faith containing, in any form whatsoever, allegations, indications or presentations that are false or likely to mislead, when these relate to one or more of the following elements: existence, nature, composition, substantial qualities, content of useful principles, species, origin, quantity, mode and date of manufacture, properties; price and conditions of sale of goods or services that are the subject of the advertising, conditions of their use, results that can be expected

from their use, reasons or procedures of the sale or provision of services; scope of commitments made by the advertiser, identity, quality or aptitudes of the manufacturer, resellers, promoters or service providers.

Article 358-11

The advertiser, on whose behalf the advertising is disseminated, is responsible, on a principal basis, for the offence committed and is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to two years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.
These penalties are applicable to advertising agents, owners of advertising media, resellers and service providers.

Article 358-12

The cessation of advertising may be ordered either on requisition of the public prosecutor, or ex officio by the investigating judge or the court seized of the prosecution.

Article 358-13

In the cases provided for by articles 358-9, 358-10, 358-11 and 358-12 above, the court seized may in addition pronounce the prohibition from exercising civil rights and from serving in functions, employment or public offices for a period that may not exceed five years and/or apply the provisions of article 214-17 of this law.

Article 358-14

Is punishable by imprisonment from three months to three years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who: counterfeits a trademark, service mark or trade mark, or fraudulently affixes a mark belonging to another; uses a mark without authorization from the owner, even with the addition of words such as "formula, style, system, imitation, type".

However, the use of a mark by manufacturers of accessories to indicate the intended purpose of the product is not punishable; holds without legitimate reason products which he knew bore a counterfeited or fraudulently affixed mark, or knowingly sells, offers for sale, supplies or offers to supply products or services under such a mark.

Article 358-15

Is punishable by imprisonment from three months to two years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who diverts the clientele of another in commercial or industrial matters: by using inaccurate or misleading titles, distinctive signs, marks or professional names to create belief in particular qualities or capacities; by resorting to measures likely to create confusion with the goods, processes or products, activities or business of another; by disparaging the goods, processes, activities or business of another, or by giving inaccurate or misleading information about his own in order to gain advantage to the detriment of his competitors.

Article 358-16

The maximum penalty is doubled if the diversion of clientele is carried out: by granting or offering to employees, agents or auxiliaries of another advantages which should not be due to them, in order to induce them to discover or reveal a secret of manufacture, organization or operation; by disclosing or exploiting such secrets learned or discovered under the conditions referred to in the preceding point.

Article 358-17

Is punishable by imprisonment from six months to one year and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who in auctions for the ownership, usufruct or lease of immovable or movable property of an enterprise, operation or service of any kind, obstructs, disturbs, attempts to obstruct or disturb the freedom of bidding or tendering by acts of violence, violence or threats, either before or during the bidding or tendering.
Is punishable by the same penalties anyone who, by gift, promise, collusion or fraudulent maneuver, removes or attempts to remove bidders, limits or attempts to limit bids or tenders, as well as the person who receives such gifts or accepts such promises.

Article 358-18

Is punishable by imprisonment from one year to ten years and a fine equal to at least four times the value of the goods or property, without such fine being less than ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who imports prohibited, expired or unfit for consumption goods or property.
The same penalty applies to anyone who produces or sells or in any manner whatsoever makes available to the population prohibited or unfit for consumption goods or property.
The same penalty is also applicable to anyone who falsifies the expiration date of such goods or property.

TITRE VI

CRIMES AND OFFENCES AGAINST PUBLIC SECURITY CHAPTER 1: OFFENCES RELATING TO TERRORISM

Section 1: Acts of terrorism Article 361-1

The following offences which, by their nature, are intended to intimidate or terrorize a population or to compel a State or an international organization,

to perform or refrain from performing any act, constitute acts of terrorism: hostage-taking; offences against civil aviation, ships, fixed platforms, and any other means of collective transport; offences against persons enjoying international protection including diplomatic agents; offences involving the use of dangerous materials.

Article 361-2

Also constitute acts of terrorism, the following offences when by their context these acts are intended to intimidate or terrorize a population or to compel a State or an international organization, to perform or refrain from performing any act: intentional attacks on life, intentional attacks on the integrity of the person, kidnapping and unlawful confinement as defined by this code; thefts, extortions, destructions, damage and deterioration, as well as computer-related offences provided for by law; criminal conspiracy; offences relating to weapons and explosive products as defined by law.

Article 361-3

The maximum penalties provided for are imposed for the offences referred to in Article 361-2 above.
The court which imposes a custodial sentence for terrorist acts must accompany it with a safety period at least equal to two-thirds of the sentence imposed.
The safety period determines a maximum non-reducible period of detention.

Section 2

Offences against civil aviation, ships, fixed platforms and any other means of collective transport

Article 361-4

Is punishable by imprisonment from eleven years to twenty-one years, anyone who, being on board an aircraft in flight, a ship or any other means of collective transport, seizes that aircraft, that ship or that means of transport by violence, threat of violence or exercises control over it.
Is punishable by the same penalty anyone who seizes a fixed platform or exercises control over it by violence or threat of violence.

Article 361-5

Is punishable by imprisonment from eleven years to twenty-one years, anyone who: destroys an aircraft in service or not at an airport serving civil aviation or causes to such an aircraft damage which renders it incapable of flight or which is likely to endanger its safety in flight; places or causes to be placed, by any means whatsoever, on an aircraft in service or not, parked, a device or substances capable of destroying the said aircraft or causing it damage which renders it incapable of flight or which is likely to endanger its safety in flight; destroys or damages air navigation facilities or services of an airport or disrupts their operation, if any of these acts is likely to endanger the safety of an aircraft in service or of civil aviation; performs an act of violence against a person on board an aircraft, if that act is likely to endanger the safety of the aircraft or of civil aviation.
The same penalties are applicable when the facts set out above concern a fixed platform, a ship or any other means of collective transport.

Article 361-6

If the acts provided for in Articles 361-4 and 361-5 above result in injuries or illnesses, the penalty is imprisonment from twenty-one to thirty years.
If death has resulted, the penalty is life imprisonment.

Article 361-7

An aircraft is considered to be in flight from the moment when, boarding being completed, all its external doors have been closed until the moment when one of these doors is opened for disembarkation. In the case of a forced landing, the flight is deemed to continue until the competent authority takes charge of the aircraft as well as the persons and property on board.
An aircraft is considered to be in service from the moment when ground personnel or the crew begins to prepare it for a specific flight until the expiration of a period of twenty-four hours following any landing. The period of service extends in any event to the entirety of the time during which the aircraft is in flight within the meaning of the preceding paragraph.
The term ship means a vessel of any type whatsoever which is not permanently attached to the sea-bed and includes dynamically supported craft, submersible vehicles and all other floating craft.
The expression fixed platform means an artificial island, an installation or a structure permanently attached to the sea-bed for the purposes of exploration or exploitation of resources or for other economic or scientific purposes.

Article 361-8

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of three million (3,000,000) to thirty million (30,000,000) CFA francs, whoever, by communicating information which he knew to be false, compromises the safety of a fixed platform, an aircraft in service, a ship or any other means of collective transport in service.

Section 3

Offences against persons enjoying international protection

Article 361-9

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years whoever:	commits or threatens to commit a kidnapping or any other attack against a person or the liberty of a person enjoying international protection;	commits or threatens to commit, by resorting to violence, against the official premises, private residence or means of transport of a person enjoying international protection, an attack likely to endanger his person or liberty.
Is punished by the same penalty whoever threatens to commit a murder against a person enjoying international protection.
If injuries or illnesses result from the above acts, the penalty is imprisonment of twenty-one to thirty years.
If death has resulted therefrom, the penalty is life imprisonment.

Article 361-10

The expression "person enjoying international protection" means:	any Head of State, including each member of a collegial body performing, under the constitution of the State concerned, the functions of Head of State;	any head of government or any minister for foreign affairs, when such person is in a foreign State as well as members of his family who accompany him;	any representative, official or official personality of a State and any official, official personality or other agent of an international organization, who at the date and place where an offence is committed against his person, his official premises, his private residence or his means of transport, is entitled under international law to

special protection against any attack on his person, liberty or dignity as well as members of his family who form part of his household.

Section 4: Hostage-taking Article 361-11

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years whoever seizes a person or detains him and threatens to kill him, injure him or continue to detain him in order to compel a third party, namely a State, an international organization, a population, a natural or legal person or a group of persons, to do or abstain from doing any act as an explicit or implicit condition for the release of the hostage.
If injuries or illnesses result from the above acts, the penalty is imprisonment of twenty-one years to thirty years.
If death has resulted therefrom, the penalty is life imprisonment.

Section 5: Offences by use of dangerous materials Article 361-12

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of twenty-one years to thirty years whoever:	uses against a ship or a fixed platform or discharges from a ship, explosives, radioactive materials or biological, chemical or nuclear weapons, in a manner likely to cause death or serious bodily or material damage;	uses on board a ship or a fixed platform explosives, radioactive materials or biological, chemical or nuclear weapons, in a manner likely to cause death or serious bodily or material damage;	discharges from a ship or a fixed platform, hydrocarbons, liquefied natural gas or other harmful or potentially dangerous substances, which are not covered by the preceding paragraph, in such quantity or

concentration as is likely to cause death or serious bodily or material damage;	uses a ship in a manner which causes serious material damage;	threatens to commit any of the offences referred to in the preceding bullet points.
If injuries or illnesses have resulted from the above acts, the penalty is imprisonment of twenty-one years to thirty years.
If death has resulted therefrom, the penalty is life imprisonment.

Article 361-13

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of twenty-one to thirty years whoever transports on board a ship:	explosives or radioactive materials, knowing that they are intended to cause or threaten to cause death, serious bodily or material damage;	any biological, chemical or nuclear weapon knowingly;	source material or special fissionable products, equipment or materials specially designed or prepared for the processing, use or production of special fissionable products, knowing that these materials, products or equipment are intended for a nuclear explosive activity or any other illicit nuclear activity;	equipment, materials or software, or related technologies which contribute significantly to the design, manufacture or delivery of a biological, chemical or nuclear weapon.
If injuries or illnesses have resulted from the above acts, the penalty is imprisonment of twenty-one to thirty years.
If death has resulted therefrom, the penalty is life imprisonment.

Article 361-14

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of twenty-one years to thirty years anyone who: holds, transfers, alters, transfers ownership of, disperses, unlawfully uses or threatens to use nuclear or radioactive materials, resulting in or capable of resulting in death or serious injury to others or substantial damage to property or the environment; manufactures or holds a device, with the intention of causing the death of a person or causing them serious bodily harm or with the intention of causing substantial damage to property or the environment; uses radioactive materials or devices in any manner whatsoever, uses or damages a nuclear installation, so as to release or risk releasing radioactive materials, with the intention of causing the death of a person or causing them serious bodily harm or with the intention of causing substantial damage to property or the environment or with the intention of compelling a natural or legal person, an international organization or a government to perform an act or to refrain from doing so; fraudulently removes or threatens to remove, diverts or unlawfully appropriates nuclear materials; unlawfully transports, sends or moves nuclear materials to or from a State; unlawfully commits or threatens to commit an act against a nuclear installation or disrupts its operation, an act by which the perpetrator knows that it may cause death or serious injury to others or substantial damage to property or the environment as a result of exposure to nuclear materials through threat, use of force or any other form of intimidation; demands the surrender of radioactive materials or devices or nuclear installations by resorting to threat in circumstances that make it credible or to the use of force;
introduces into the atmosphere, on the ground, in the subsoil, in food or food components, in water or in objects of use, a substance likely to endanger the health of humans or animals or the natural environment, when this act is intended to intimidate or terrorize a population or to compel a State or an international organization to perform or refrain from performing any act whatsoever.
If injuries or illnesses result from the above acts, the penalty is imprisonment of twenty-one years to thirty years.
If death has resulted, the penalty is life imprisonment.

Section 6: Preparatory and support acts Article 361-15

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years, anyone who provides or facilitates the provision of weapons, knowing that they may be used for the commission of one of the offences provided for in this chapter.

Article 361-16

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years, anyone who recruits, maintains or provides training to another person to commit or participate in the commission of one of the offences provided for in this chapter or asks them to commit or participate in the commission of one of these offences or to join an association or a group, with the intention or knowing that the purpose of this recruitment or this request is to participate in the commission of one or more offences provided for in this chapter.

Article 361-17

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years:	the national who travels or attempts to travel to a State other than their State of residence or of which they are a national, or any person who leaves or attempts to leave the national territory to travel to a State other than their State of residence or nationality, with the intention of committing,

organizing or preparing acts of terrorism, or in order to participate therein or to provide or receive training in terrorism;	any person who deliberately provides or collects, by any means whatsoever, directly or indirectly, funds that they intend to use or which they know will be used to finance the travel of persons who are traveling to a State other than their State of residence or of which they are nationals, with the intention of committing, organizing or preparing acts of terrorism, or in order to participate therein or to provide or receive training in terrorism;	any person who, on the national territory, deliberately organizes the travel of persons who are traveling to a State other than their State of residence or of which they are nationals, with the intention of committing, organizing or preparing acts of terrorism, or in order to participate therein or to provide or receive training in terrorism, or participation in other activities that facilitate these acts, including recruitment.

Article 361-18

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to twenty million (20,000,000) CFA francs, the act by any person of being unable to justify resources corresponding to their lifestyle, while being in regular contact with one or more persons engaging in one or more of the terrorist acts defined in this chapter.

Article 361-19

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, the act of publicly glorifying terrorist acts.
When the acts have been committed using an online public communication service or through written or audiovisual press, the term of imprisonment is eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 361-20

Constitutes an act of terrorism punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, the act of training or being trained in the handling of weapons or in any form of combat, in the manufacture or use of explosive, incendiary, nuclear, radiological, biological or chemical substances or in the piloting of aircraft for terrorist purposes.

Article 361-21

Constitutes an act of terrorism punished by a term of imprisonment of three years to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) francs to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, the act of habitually consulting, for terrorist purposes, one or more online public communication services or possessing documents directly inciting the commission of acts of terrorism or glorifying them.

Section 7: Financing of terrorism Article 361-22

Offences relating to the financing of terrorism are governed by the legislative and regulatory provisions relating to the fight against the financing of terrorism in Burkina Faso.

Section 8: Particular provision Article 361-23

For the offences provided for in this chapter, the court seized may, in the event of conviction, order the freezing, confiscation of property and prohibition of residence or territory.

CHAPTER 2: CRIMINAL ASSOCIATION AND ASSISTANCE TO CRIMINALS

Article 362-1

Any association or agreement whatever its duration and the number of its members, formed or established for the purpose of preparing or committing crimes against persons or property, constitutes the crime of criminal association which exists by the mere fact of the resolution to act decided in common.

Article 362-2

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, any individual who is part of the association or agreement defined in Article 362-1 above.
The imprisonment is eleven years to thirty years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, for the leaders of the association or agreement or for those who have exercised any command therein.

Article 362-3

Benefit from an absolute excuse those perpetrators who, before any attempt to commit a crime that is the object of the association or agreement and before any prosecution, were the first to reveal to the authorities the established agreement or the existence of the association.

Article 362-4

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, knowingly harbours a person whom he knows to have committed a crime or an offence and whom he knows to be sought by justice for that reason, or who removes or attempts to remove that person from searches or arrest, or helps him to hide or to flee.
The above provision does not apply to the spouse, relatives or in-laws of the perpetrator of the crime or offence up to and including the fourth degree.

CHAPITRE 3 : DE LA REBELLION

Article 363-1

Any attack or resistance carried out with violence or assault against officials or representatives of public authority acting for the execution of orders or ordinances emanating from that authority or of laws, regulations, judicial decisions or warrants of justice constitutes rebellion.
Threats of violence of a serious nature are assimilated to violence itself.

Article 363-2

Is punished by imprisonment of two months to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, rebellion committed by one or two persons.
The term of imprisonment is one year to three years and the fine five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, when the rebellion is committed in a gathering of more than two persons.
If the rebellion is committed by more than twenty persons, the perpetrators are punished by a term of imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 363-3

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to two years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, any person who commits a rebellion while carrying a weapon.
The term of imprisonment is two years to five years and the fine seven hundred thousand (700,000) to seven million (7,000,000) CFA francs, if in the gathering, more than two individuals are carrying weapons.
If the rebellion is committed by more than twenty persons and there is carrying of weapons, the term of imprisonment is eleven years to twenty-one years and the fine three million (3,000,000) to fifteen million (15,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 363-4

For the offences provided for in this chapter, the court seized may pronounce the prohibition from exercising civil rights and from serving in functions, employments or public offices for a duration that may not exceed five years.

Article 363-5

Persons found carrying concealed weapons, having been part of a group or gathering deemed unarmed, are individually punished as in the case of an armed troop or gathering.

Article 363-6

Anyone who incites rebellion either by speeches delivered in public places or meetings, or by placards, posters, leaflets or writings, is punished as an accomplice to rebellion.

Article 363-7

There may be pronounced against the instigators, leaders of the rebellion, a residence ban for a duration that may not exceed five years.

Article 363-8

In the case of rebellion in a group, no penalty is pronounced against rebels who have no role to play in the group, who withdrew at the first warning from the public authority, or who were seized outside the place of rebellion without resistance and without weapons.

Article 363-9

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to six months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, anyone who, by assault, opposes the execution of works ordered or authorized by the public authority.
Those who, by gathering, threats or violence, oppose the execution of these works, are punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to two years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.

CHAPITRE 4

DE L'EVASION ET AUTRES VIOLATIONS DES REGLEMENTS EN MATIERE D'ADMINISTRATION PENITENTIAIRE

Article 364-1

Constitutes an escape the act, by a detainee, of evading the custody to which he is subject.
Escape is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to two years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs.
When the escape is attempted or carried out by violence, breaking and entering or corruption, even if these offences were committed, in concert with the detainee, by a third party, the imprisonment is three years to five years and the fine five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.
For the application of this article, is considered as detained any person:	who is placed in police custody;	who is in the process of or being presented to the judicial authority at the end of police custody or in execution of a warrant to bring or arrest;	who has been notified of a committal warrant, an arrest warrant or a provisional custody order continuing to produce effect;	who is executing a custodial sentence or who has been arrested to execute that sentence;	who is placed under extradition detention;	who is the subject of a writ of capias;	who is placed under a community service regime.

Article 364-2

The sentence pronounced for escape is cumulative with any temporary custodial sentence imposed for the offence that motivated the arrest or detention.
If the prosecution for this latter offence results in an order or decision of no case to answer, a decision of acquittal or discharge, the duration of the pre-trial detention served on that count is not credited against the duration of the sentence pronounced for escape or attempted escape.

Article 364-3

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, any person serving as escort or manning the posts who, through negligence, permits or facilitates an escape.

Article 364-4

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of three years to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs the act, by any person responsible for his supervision, of facilitating or preparing, even by voluntary abstention, the escape of a detainee.
These provisions are also applicable to any person authorized by his functions to enter a penitentiary establishment or to approach, in any capacity whatsoever, detainees.
The perpetrator is subject to prohibition from any public employment or any public function for a duration that may not exceed five years.

Article 364-5

Is punishable by imprisonment from six months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs the act of providing a detainee with any means to escape from the custody to which he was subject.

If the assistance thus provided is accompanied by violence, breaking and entering or corruption, the imprisonment is from three to five years and the fine from three hundred thousand (300,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.
If this assistance consists of the provision or use of a weapon or an explosive, incendiary or toxic substance, the imprisonment is from five to ten years and the fine from three million (3,000,000) to ten million five hundred thousand (10,500,000) CFA francs.

Article 364-6

All those who knowingly provide or facilitate an escape are jointly and severally liable for payment of damages owed to the victim or his beneficiaries in compensation for the harm caused by the offense for which the escapee was detained.
In addition, a residence ban may be imposed for a period not exceeding five years.

Article 364-7

Is punishable by imprisonment from two months to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs the act, wherever it occurs, of delivering or causing to reach a detainee, or receiving from him and transmitting sums of money, correspondence, objects or substances of any kind as well as communicating by any means with a detained person, outside cases authorized by regulations.
The penalty is imprisonment from six months to two years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs if the perpetrator is responsible for supervising detainees or if he is authorized by his duties to enter a penitentiary establishment or to approach, in any capacity whatsoever, detainees.

Article 364-8

Is punishable by imprisonment from two months to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs the act of entering a penitentiary establishment or climbing over

its enclosure, without being authorized by virtue of legislative or regulatory provisions or having been authorized by the competent authorities.

Article 364-9

The attempt of the offenses provided for in this chapter is punishable.

TITRE VII

OFFENSES AGAINST CURRENCY, MARKS, SECURITIES OR OTHER FIDUCIARY VALUES ISSUED BY PUBLIC AUTHORITY AND FORGERY

CHAPITRE 1: COUNTERFEITING OF CURRENCY

Section 1: General provisions Article 371-1

The provisions of this chapter are intended to punish counterfeiting of currency and other offenses against monetary signs. They apply to offenses committed:	on national territory;	on the territory of other member States of WAEMU;	abroad, outside member States of WAEMU, according to the distinctions and conditions provided by the legislation in force.

Article 371-2

For the purposes of this chapter, the following are understood as:	competent authorities: bodies which, by virtue of a legal or regulatory provision, are authorized to carry out or order the acts or measures provided for by the uniform law relating to counterfeiting of currency;	BCEAO or Central Bank: the Central Bank of West African States;	counterfeiting: the manufacture of a monetary sign imitating a monetary sign issued by the BCEAO or any other authorized foreign issuing institute;
foreigner: any person who lives in the Union without having the nationality of one of the member States of WAEMU;	falsification: the alteration of a monetary sign with a view to modifying its substance or weight;	counterfeit currency (counterfeit banknotes or counterfeit coins): banknotes and coins which have the appearance of banknotes or coins issued by the BCEAO or any other authorized foreign issuing body or, although intended to be put into circulation, have not yet been issued by the institutions authorized for this purpose;	counterfeiting of currency:
•	all fraudulent acts (counterfeiting and falsification) of manufacture or alteration of monetary signs issued by the BCEAO or any other foreign issuing institute authorized for this purpose, whatever the means employed to produce the result;
•	the putting into circulation of counterfeit currency with full knowledge;
•	the act of holding, importing, exporting, transporting, receiving or obtaining counterfeit currency, with the aim of putting it into circulation with full knowledge;
•	the fraudulent act of manufacturing, holding, receiving or obtaining instruments, objects, computer programs or any other process intended, by their nature, for the manufacture of counterfeit currency, the alteration of currencies or the manufacture of security elements of monetary signs;	FCFA: Franc of the African Financial Community;	putting counterfeit currency into circulation: the issuance of counterfeit currency, regardless of the number of banknotes or coins circulated;	reproduction of monetary signs: creation of any tangible or intangible image which presents a resemblance to a banknote or the image of a coin, whatever the size of the image, the materials, instruments and techniques used to produce it and

regardless of whether the patterns, letters and symbols appearing on the monetary sign have been modified or not;	monetary signs: banknotes or coins having or having had legal tender;	WAMU or Union: West African Monetary Union.

Section 2: Incriminations and applicable penalties Article 371-3

The counterfeiting or falsification of banknotes or coins having legal tender on the national territory of a member State of WAEMU or abroad is punishable by fixed-term imprisonment from ten years to twenty years and a fine of an amount equal to ten times the value of said signs without being less than twenty million (20,000,000) CFA francs.
Is punishable by the same penalties, the counterfeiting or falsification of banknotes or coins which, although intended to be put into circulation, have not yet been issued by the institutions authorized for this purpose.
If the offender benefits from mitigating circumstances, the penalty cannot be less than five years' imprisonment and a fine of five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.
Suspended sentence cannot be granted.

Article 371-4

The custodial sentence provided for in the first two paragraphs of the preceding article is accompanied by a safety period of seven years.
During the safety period, the convicted person cannot benefit from provisions relating to the method of sentence adjustment, in particular those concerning the suspension or splitting of the sentence, external placement, release permits, semi-liberty and conditional release.

Article 371-5

The counterfeiting or falsification of banknotes or coins having had legal tender on national territory or abroad, is punishable by imprisonment from two years to five years and a fine of an amount equal to ten times the value of said signs, without being less than two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 371-6

The manufacture of banknotes and coins carried out using authorized installations or equipment intended for this purpose, when it is carried out in violation of the conditions set by the institutions authorized to issue these monetary signs and without their agreement, is punishable by the penalties provided for in Article 371-3 above.

Article 371-7

The putting into circulation, use, display, distribution, importation, exportation, transport, receipt, possession, with full knowledge, of counterfeit or falsified monetary signs having legal tender, is punished by imprisonment of five years to seven years and a fine of an amount equal to ten times the value of said signs without being less than five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.
When they are committed by an organized gang, the offences provided for in the preceding paragraph are punished by the penalties provided for in Article 371-3 above.
The putting into circulation, use, display, distribution, importation, exportation, transport, receipt, possession, of counterfeit or falsified monetary signs having had legal tender, with full knowledge, is punished by imprisonment of one year to three years and a fine of an amount equal to ten times the value of said signs, without being less than one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.
When they are committed by an organized gang, the offences provided for in paragraph 3 of this article are punished by the penalties provided for in Article 371-5 above.

Article 371-8

Are punished by a fine equal to ten times their value, without the amount of the fine being less than two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) CFA francs, those who, having received monetary signs believing them to be good and who, after having learned of their defects, knowingly keep them and refrain from handing them over to the BCEAO or to the competent authorities.
Are punished by a fine equal to ten times their value, without the amount being less than two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, credit institutions, decentralized financial systems, manual exchange agents and postal financial services which, having received during operations with their customers, counterfeit or falsified monetary signs, have not retained them, against receipt, for the purpose of handing them over to the BCEAO or to the competent authorities.

Article 371-9

The putting back into circulation, after having discovered their defects, of counterfeit or falsified banknotes which were believed to be good at the time of receipt, is punished by imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine of an amount equal to ten times the value of said signs without being less than five hundred thousand (500,000) CFA francs.

Article 371-10

The manufacture, offer, receipt, importation, exportation, or possession, without having been authorized, of marks, materials, apparatus, instruments, computer programs, or any other element specially intended for the manufacture or protection against counterfeiting or falsification of banknotes or coins is punished by imprisonment of five years to seven years and a fine of five million (5,000,000) CFA francs to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 371-11

The manufacture, possession, putting into circulation, use, display, distribution, importation or exportation of unauthorized monetary signs, intended to replace coins or banknotes having legal tender on the national territory or abroad, is punished by imprisonment of five years to seven years and a fine of five million (5,000,000) CFA francs to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.
Is punished by the same penalties, the possession, putting into circulation, use, display, distribution, importation or exportation of banknotes and coins which, although intended to be put into circulation, have not yet been issued by the institutions authorized for this purpose and do not yet have legal tender on the national territory or abroad.

Article 371-12

The manufacture, possession, putting into circulation, use, display, distribution, importation or exportation of printed matter, forms or tokens intended to be accepted as a means of payment, is punished by imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) CFA francs to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 371-13

Is punished by imprisonment of six months to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) CFA francs to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, whoever:	reproduces, totally or partially, by any process whatsoever, monetary signs having legal tender on the national territory or abroad, without the prior authorization of the BCEAO or, in the case of foreign monetary signs, of the authority which issued them;	displays, distributes, imports or exports reproductions of monetary signs, including by way of newspapers, books or prospectuses without the prior authorization of the Central Bank or, in the case of foreign monetary signs, of the authority which issued them;	uses banknotes having legal tender on the national territory or abroad, as a medium for any advertising whatsoever.

Article 371-14

The deliberate deterioration, soiling or overloading of a monetary sign is punished by imprisonment of one month to six months and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) CFA francs to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, when it has the effect of rendering it unfit for use as a means of payment.

Article 371-15

The refusal to receive currency having legal tender in a Member State of the Union according to the value for which it has tender is punished by a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs.

Article 371-16

The collection of a commission in consideration for the handing over of monetary signs issued by the BCEAO in exchange for other monetary signs of its issue, is punished by imprisonment of one year to three years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) CFA francs to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 371-17

Are confiscated, whatever the classification of the offence, the counterfeit or falsified monetary signs and others referred to in Articles 371-3 to 371-14 above as well as the metals, papers and other materials found in the possession of the offenders and intended for the commission of similar offences.
Are also confiscated, the instruments having served to commit the offence, except when they have been used without the knowledge of their owner.

Article 371-18

The competent court shall mandatorily pronounce against natural persons found guilty of the offences provided for in Articles 371-3 to 371-12 above, the following additional penalties:	the prohibition from exercising an activity in the banking and financial sector for a period not exceeding twenty years;	the prohibition of residence, permanently, or for a period not exceeding twenty years for foreigners.

It may, in addition, pronounce, against them, the prohibition of civil rights for a period not exceeding twenty years.

Article 371-19

Legal persons other than the State are criminally liable for the offences defined in this, when they are committed on their behalf by their organs or representatives.
The legal person found criminally liable is, without prejudice to the penalties incurred by the natural persons co-perpetrators or accomplices of the same acts, punished by a fine equal to five times the amount provided for natural persons.
The competent court shall pronounce in addition the following additional penalties:	the dissolution of the legal person, when it has been created or diverted from its corporate purpose to commit the offences referred to in Articles 371-3 to 371-12 above;	the permanent closure of the enterprise or for a period between one year and five years.

Article 371-20

The attempt of the offences referred to in this chapter is punishable.

Article 371-21

In case of recidivism, the penalties provided for in this chapter are doubled.
Convictions pronounced by the criminal courts of a Member State of WAEMU for the offences provided for by this law are taken into account for the purposes of recidivism in all other Member States.

Article 371-22

Any person who, having taken part in the offences provided for in Articles 371-3 to 371-12 above, has informed the competent authorities thereof or has revealed the perpetrators before any prosecution, is exempted from penalties. He or she may, nevertheless, be prohibited from residing if he or she has the status of a foreigner.
Any person who, having taken part in the offences referred to in the preceding paragraph, has, after the initiation of prosecution, enabled the arrest of the other participants, may be exempted from penalties, totally or partially. He or she may, nevertheless, be prohibited from residing if he or she has the status of a foreigner.

Article 371-23

When it pronounces a conviction in application of the provisions of this chapter, the competent court may order the posting or dissemination of all or part of the decision or of a press release informing the public of the reasons for and the operative part thereof.
It shall determine, where appropriate, the extracts from the decision and the terms of the press release which must be posted or disseminated.
The posting or dissemination of the decision or press release may include the identity of the victim only with his or her consent or that of his or her legal representative or successors in title.
The posting shall be carried out in the places and for the duration indicated by the court. Unless otherwise decided by the court, the posting may not exceed two months. In case of removal, concealment, or tearing of the posted notices, posting shall be carried out again at the expense of the person found guilty of these acts.
The dissemination of the decision shall be made by one or more press publications or by one or more electronic communication services to the public. The publications or electronic communication services to the public responsible for this dissemination are designated by the court. They may not oppose this dissemination.
The posting and dissemination may be ordered cumulatively.

The posting of the decision pronounced or the dissemination thereof shall be at the expense of the convicted person. The posting or dissemination costs recovered from the latter may not, however, exceed the maximum fine incurred.

Section 3: Applicable procedure Article 371-24

By way of derogation from the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, the correctional courts have jurisdiction to hear the crimes provided for in this chapter.
The procedure followed is that applicable in correctional matters.

Article 371-25

By way of derogation from the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, for the offences provided for in this chapter, the public prosecution is subject to limitation according to the following distinctions:	twenty years for crimes;	ten years for offences.

Article 371-26

When they are seized of cases relating to counterfeiting or discover, during their investigations, counterfeit or falsified monetary signs, the competent authorities are required to transmit to the Central Bank, for analysis and identification, at least one specimen of each type of banknotes or coins suspected to be false.
The provisions of the preceding paragraph are not applicable when there exists only one specimen of a type of banknotes or coins suspected to be false, as long as it is necessary for the establishment of the truth.

Article 371-27

Counterfeit or falsified monetary signs as well as materials and instruments intended to be used for their manufacture, confiscated in application of Article 371-17, are handed over to the Central Bank for their possible destruction, subject to the needs of the administration of justice.

Article 371-28

When the Central Bank recognizes as counterfeit or falsified, monetary signs which are handed over to it, it is authorized to retain them and possibly to destroy them, subject to the needs of the administration of justice.

CHAPTER 2

COUNTERFEITING OF STATE SEALS, PUBLIC OR PRIVATE INSTRUMENTS, HALLMARKS, STAMPS AND MARKS

Article 372-1

Any person who counterfeits a seal of the State or makes use of a counterfeit seal is punished by a term of imprisonment of twenty-one years to thirty years and a fine of ten million (10,000,000) to one hundred million (100,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 372-2

Any person who counterfeits or falsifies either one or more national stamps, or one or more hallmarks of the State used to mark gold or silver materials or who makes use of falsified or counterfeit stamps or hallmarks is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of ten million (10,000,000) to fifty million (50,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 372-3

Any person who, having unlawfully obtained genuine stamps or hallmarks of the State referred to in the preceding article, makes an application or use thereof prejudicial to the rights and interests of the State, its subdivisions and third parties is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of five million (5,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 372-4

Any person who is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to six months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs:	manufactures the seals, stamps, marks, cachets of the State or of any authority without the written order of the accredited representatives of the State or of that authority;	manufactures, holds, distributes, purchases or sells stamps, seals, marks or cachets likely to be confused with those of the State or of any authority, even foreign.

Article 372-5

Any person who manufactures, sells, hawks, distributes or uses printed matter which, by its format, colour, text, typographical layout or any other characteristic, presents with letterheads or official printed matter in use in institutions, public administrations and the various courts, a resemblance likely to cause confusion in the mind of the public is punished by a term of imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs.

Article 372-6

Any person who is punished by a term of imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs:	counterfeits the marks intended to be affixed in the name of the government or of a public service on the various kinds of foodstuffs or goods or who makes use of these false marks;	counterfeits the seal, stamp or mark of any authority or makes use of the counterfeit seal, stamp or mark;	counterfeits or falsifies postage stamps, franking impressions or reply coupons issued by the Burkinabe postal administration, tax stamps

mobile stamped papers	or forms stamps,	impressions, reply coupons, stamped papers or forms counterfeit or falsified.
In addition, the prohibition from exercising civil and professional rights and/or the prohibition from residing for a period which may not exceed five years may be pronounced.

Article 372-7

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, having unduly obtained genuine seals, marks or printed matter provided for in the preceding article, makes or attempts to make fraudulent application or use thereof.
In addition, disqualification from exercising civil and/or professional rights and/or prohibition from residence may be pronounced for a period that may not exceed five years.

Article 372-8

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, anyone who: knowingly makes use of postage stamps, revenue stamps or stamped papers or forms that have already been used or who, by any means, alters stamps for the purpose of removing them from cancellation and thus permitting their subsequent reuse; overprints by printing, perforation or any other means Burkinabé postage stamps or other postal fiduciary values, expired or not, or who sells, hawks, offers, distributes, exports postage stamps thus overprinted; counterfeits, imitates or alters stamps, labels, franking impressions or reply coupons issued by the postal service of a foreign country, sells, hawks or distributes said stamps, labels, franking impressions or reply coupons or knowingly makes use thereof.

Article 372-9

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to two years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs, anyone who is guilty of manufacturing, introducing into Burkina Faso, selling or distributing any objects, tokens, printed matter or forms, obtained by any process whatsoever and which, by their appearance, would present with annuity certificates, shares, bonds, interest shares, dividend or interest coupons relating thereto and generally with fiduciary securities issued by companies or private enterprises, a resemblance of a nature to facilitate the acceptance of said objects, tokens, printed matter or forms in place of the imitated securities.
In addition, disqualification from exercising civil and professional rights and prohibition from residence may be pronounced for a period that may not exceed five years.

Article 372-10

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of twenty-one to thirty years and a fine of ten million (10,000,000) to one hundred million (100,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who counterfeits, falsifies or alters certificates, bonds or obligations issued by the public treasury with its stamp or mark, or interest coupons relating to these certificates, bonds or obligations.

Article 372-11

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of twenty-one to thirty years and a fine of ten million (10,000,000) to one hundred million (100,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, in any manner whatsoever, knowingly participates in the issue, distribution, sale or introduction into Burkina Faso of the certificates, bonds or obligations designated in the preceding article.

Article 372-12

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two years to ten years and a fine of six hundred thousand (600,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who manufactures, acquires, possesses or transfers knowingly products or equipment intended for the commission of the offences punished above unless the act constitutes a more serious offence.

Article 372-13

Benefits from an absolute excuse one of the perpetrators of the crimes mentioned in articles 372-10 and 372-11 above who, before the consummation of these crimes and before any prosecution, gives knowledge thereof to the authorities and reveals the identity of the perpetrators or who, even after prosecution has commenced, facilitates the arrest of the other perpetrators.

Article 372-14

In the case of the offences referred to in articles 372-9, 372-10 and 372-12 above, the trial court pronounces the confiscation of products and equipment.
It may in addition order the closure of the establishment for a period that may not exceed five years.

CHAPITRE 3 : DU FAUX

Article 373-1

Constitutes a forgery, any fraudulent alteration of the truth of a nature to cause prejudice and accomplished by any means whatsoever, in a writing or any other medium for the expression of thought which has as its object or which may have the effect of establishing proof of a right or of a fact having legal consequences.

Article 373-2

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to nine hundred thousand (900,000) CFA francs, anyone who has unduly obtained or attempts to unduly obtain an authentic or public document: either by making false declarations; or by taking a false name or a false qualification; or by providing false information, certificates or attestations.

Article 373-3

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to five years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who has taken the name of a third party in circumstances which have determined or could have determined the recording of a conviction on the criminal record of the latter.
Is punished by the penalties provided for in the first paragraph anyone who, by false declarations relating to the civil status of a person under examination, has knowingly been the cause of the recording of a conviction on the criminal record of another than this person under examination.

Article 373-4

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of one hundred thousand (100,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs anyone who, by taking a false name or a false qualification, has obtained an extract from the criminal record of a third party.
Is punished by the same penalties anyone who provides imaginary identity information which causes or could have caused erroneous entries on the criminal record.

Article 373-5

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs, anyone not a party to the act who makes before a public authority a declaration that he or she knew was not in conformity with the truth.
However, benefits from an absolute excuse anyone who, having made as a witness before a public authority a declaration not in conformity with the truth, retracts before prejudice to another results from the use of the act and before he or she is himself or herself the subject of prosecution.

Article 373-6

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, whoever commits or attempts to commit a forgery in private, commercial or banking writing, under one of the following conditions:
either by counterfeiting or alteration of writing or signature;	either by fabrication of agreements, provisions, obligations or discharges or by their subsequent insertion in these acts;	either by addition, omission or alteration of clauses, declarations or facts that these acts were intended to receive or record;	either by impersonation or substitution of persons.
The penalty is imprisonment of three years to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, when the perpetrator is a banker, a director or manager of a company and in general a person who has made a public appeal for the issuance of shares, bonds, vouchers, units or any securities whatsoever, either of a company or of a commercial or industrial enterprise.
There may in addition be pronounced against the perpetrators of the above-mentioned acts the prohibition from exercising civil and professional rights and the prohibition of residence for a period which may not exceed five years.

Article 373-7

In cases of forgery in private, commercial or banking writing, whoever makes use of the document which he knew to be false is punished by the penalties provided for in Article 373-4 above.

Article 373-8

Public writing is the work, or is deemed to be the work of a public agent.
Public agent means any civil or military person who holds a legislative, executive, administrative or judicial mandate, whether appointed or elected, on a permanent or temporary basis, whether remunerated or not, and regardless of their hierarchical level or seniority.
Authentic writing is the work which emanates or is deemed to emanate from a public officer or a person appointed by law to draw up certain acts or make certain findings.
Commercial or banking writing is writing which has the purpose of recording a transaction constituting an act of commerce.

Private writing is that which is neither public, nor authentic, nor commercial.

Article 373-9

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of five million (5,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, any civil servant or public officer who, in the exercise of his functions, commits a forgery in authentic or public writing:	either by false signature;	either by alteration of acts, writings or signatures;	either by impersonation or substitution of persons;	either by writings made or inserted in registers or in other public acts, after their completion or closure.

Article 373-10

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of five million (5,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, any civil servant or public officer who, in drafting acts of his function, fraudulently misrepresents the substance or circumstances thereof either:	by writing agreements other than those which were drawn up or dictated by the parties;	by recording as true facts which he knew to be false;	by attesting as having been acknowledged or having occurred in his presence facts which were not;	by voluntarily omitting or modifying declarations received by him.

Article 373-11

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, whoever other than the person designated in the preceding article commits a forgery in authentic or public writing.

Article 373-12

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two years to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, whoever, in the cases referred to above, makes use of the document which he knew to be false.

Article 373-13

Are punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to six months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, lodging house keepers, hoteliers and innkeepers who knowingly register in their registers under false or assumed names the persons lodged with them or who, in collusion with them, omit to register them.
They are in addition civilly liable for restitution, compensation and costs awarded to the victims of crimes and offences committed during their stay by these persons.
The closure of the establishment may be pronounced.

Article 373-14

There may in addition be pronounced against the perpetrators of the above-mentioned acts the prohibition from exercising civil and professional rights and the prohibition of residence for a period which may not exceed five years.

CHAPITRE 4 : DU FAUX TEMOIGNAGE, DU FAUX SERMENT ET DE L'OMISSION DE TEMOIGNER

Article 374-1

False testimony is the voluntary alteration of the truth made under oath by a witness in a deposition that has become irrevocable with the aim of deceiving justice in favour of or to the detriment of one of the parties.

Article 374-2

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, whoever is guilty of false testimony in criminal matters against the accused or in his favour.

The penalty is imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs if the false witness has received money, any reward or promises.
In case of conviction of the accused to life imprisonment, the false witness who testified against him incurs imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of five million (5,000,000) to fifty million (50,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 374-3

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of six hundred thousand (600,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs, whoever is guilty of false testimony in offence matters against the defendant or in his favour.
The maximum penalty is pronounced if the false witness has received money, any reward or promises.

Article 374-4

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of three to six months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, whoever is guilty of false testimony in simple police matters against the defendant or in his favour.
The maximum penalty is pronounced if the false witness has received money, any reward or promises.

Article 374-5

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of six hundred thousand (600,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, whoever is guilty of false testimony in civil, commercial, social or administrative matters.
The maximum penalty is pronounced if the false witness has received money, any reward or promises.

Article 374-6

Commits the offence of subornation of witness and is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, whoever in any matter, at any stage of proceedings or with a view to a claim or defence in court, uses promises, offers or gifts, pressure, threats, acts of violence, manoeuvres or artifices to induce another to make or deliver a false testimony, declaration or attestation, whether or not the subornation has produced effect, unless the act constitutes complicity in one of the more serious offences provided for in Articles 374-2, 374-3, 374-4 and 374-5 above.

Article 374-7

Is punished by the penalties for false testimony according to the distinctions provided in articles 374-2, 374-3, 374-4 and 374-5 above, the interpreter who, during a trial, knowingly distorts the substance of oral statements or documents translated orally.
Where the distortion is made in the written translation of a document intended or capable of establishing proof of a right or of a fact having legal effects, the interpreter is punished by the penalties for forgery in writing according to the distinctions provided in articles 373-7, 373-8, 373-9 and 373-10 above.

Article 374-8

Is liable to the penalties for false testimony according to the distinctions provided in articles 374-2 to 374-5 above, the expert who, appointed by the judicial authority, gives orally or in writing, at any stage of the proceedings, a false opinion or affirms facts which he knows do not conform to reality.

Article 374-9

The subornation of an interpreter or expert is punished as the subornation of a witness according to the provisions of article 374-6 above.

Article 374-10

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs, any person to whom an oath is deferred or referred in civil matters and who takes a false oath.

Article 374-11

Any person who, knowing the proof of the innocence of a person provisionally imprisoned or convicted for an offence or crime, voluntarily refrains from immediately bringing testimony thereof to the judicial or police authorities, is punished:	if it concerns a crime, by a term of imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine of six hundred thousand (600,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs;	if it concerns an offence, by a term of imprisonment of two months to two years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs.
However, no penalty is incurred by a person who brings his testimony late but spontaneously.
The provisions of this article do not apply:	to relatives in direct line up to and including the fourth degree and their spouses;	to brothers and sisters and their spouses.

CHAPITRE 5 : DE L'USURPATION OU DE L'USAGE IRREGULIER DE FONCTIONS

Article 375-1

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, unless the act constitutes a more serious offence, any person who, without title,

interferes in public, civil or military functions or performs an act of those functions.

Article 375-2

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to two years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, unless more severe penalties are provided by a special text, any person who, without fulfilling the conditions required to hold it, makes use of or claims a title attached to a legally regulated profession, an official diploma or a quality whose conditions of attribution are fixed by the public authority.

Article 375-3

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to one year and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, any person who, without right, publicly wears a regulatory uniform, a distinctive costume of a function or quality, an official insignia or a decoration of a national or foreign order, unless the act is retained as an aggravating circumstance of a more serious offence.

Article 375-4

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to six months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, any person who, either in an official act or habitually, unduly attributes to himself a title or an honorary distinction.

Article 375-5

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to six months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, any person who publicly wears a costume presenting a resemblance of a nature to intentionally cause confusion in the mind of the public with military and paramilitary uniforms or those of any official exercising judicial police functions or auxiliary police forces.

Article 375-6

Is punished by a fine of fifty thousand two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, any person who, without a public or authentic act, unduly attributes to himself an identity other than that resulting from the statements of his civil status documents.

Article 375-7

In the cases provided for in the preceding articles, the trial court may order the application of the provisions of article 214-17 of this law and furthermore that mention of the judgment be entered in the margin of authentic acts or civil status acts in which the title was unduly taken or the name altered.

Article 375-8

Is punished by a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, any person who, exercising the profession of business agent or legal or tax advisor, includes or allows to appear his quality as a former magistrate, former judicial police officer, former notary, former bailiff, former lawyer, civil servant, former civil servant, military officer or former military officer on any documents or writings whatsoever used in the context of his activity.

Article 375-9

Are punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to six months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, the founders, directors or managers of a company or establishment with a commercial, industrial or financial purpose who include or allow to appear the name of a member of the government or of an institution with mention of his quality in any publicity made in the interest of the enterprise which they direct or which they propose to found.
Are punished by the same penalties, the founders, directors or managers of a company or establishment with a commercial, industrial or financial purpose who include or allow to appear the name of a former member of the government, a magistrate or former magistrate, a civil servant or former civil servant or a high dignitary with mention of his quality in any publicity made in the interest of the enterprise which they direct or which they propose to found.

CHAPITRE 6 : DES FRAUDES AUX EXAMENS ET CONCOURS PUBLICS

Article 376-1

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to three years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, any person who, by any means and in any form whatsoever, commits fraud in or on the occasion of an examination or public competition having as its object entry into a public administration or obtaining an official diploma.

Article 376-2

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to two years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, any person who through imprudence, negligence or non-observance of regulations facilitates fraud in an examination or competition.

Article 376-3

The imprisonment is six months to three years and the fine three hundred thousand (300,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, when the fraud is committed on the occasion of an examination or competition other than public.

Article 376-4

The following are notably considered as fraud in an examination or competitive examination, all practices tending to: transmit, communicate, disseminate or sell examination papers, their answer keys or their solutions; substitute said examination papers, results or lists of candidates; modify by addition or removal of marks or names of candidates from lists relating to said examinations or competitive examinations; communicate a code or any sign to certain candidates, with a view to identifying them and attributing to them an undeserved mark;
corrupt a marker, an examiner, an invigilator, a chairperson of an examination board, a candidate or any person participating in the organisation of the competitive examination or examination; carry out any blackmail against an examiner, a marker, an invigilator, a chairperson of an examination board, a candidate or any person participating in the organisation of the competitive examination or examination; fraudulently use any means of communication.

Article 376-5

The attempt of the offences provided for in this chapter is punishable.

TITRE VIII

NARCOTICS AND DRUGS CHAPTER 1: HIGH-RISK DRUGS

Article 381-1

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven to twenty-one years and a fine of five million (5,000,000) to twenty-five million (25,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who contravenes the legislative and regulatory provisions concerning the cultivation, production, manufacture, extraction, preparation or transformation of high-risk drugs.

Article 381-2

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven to twenty-one years and a fine of ten million (10,000,000) to fifty million (50,000,000) CFA francs anyone who contravenes the legislative and regulatory provisions concerning the import, export and international transport of high-risk drugs.

Article 381-3

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven to twenty-one years and a fine of five million (5,000,000) to twenty-five million (25,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who contravenes the legislative and regulatory provisions concerning the offer, putting on sale, distribution, brokerage,

sale, delivery on any basis whatsoever, sending, dispatch, transport, purchase and possession of high-risk drugs.

Article 381-4

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two to five years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who contravenes the legislative and regulatory provisions concerning the use or possession of high-risk drugs for purposes of personal consumption.

Article 381-5

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of five million (5,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs anyone who: facilitates for another person the illicit use of high-risk drugs, for consideration or free of charge, either by providing premises for this purpose, or by any other means. This applies notably to owners, managers, directors, operators in any capacity whatsoever of a hotel, furnished house, boarding house, drinking establishment, restaurant, club, circle, dance hall, any place of entertainment open to the public or used by the public or any other place, who tolerate the use of high-risk drugs in said establishments or their annexes or in said places. Fraudulent intent is presumed in the event of a positive check by a police service; issues prescriptions of complaisance for high-risk drugs; knowing the fictitious or complaisance nature of the prescriptions, dispenses high-risk drugs; by means of fictitious or complaisance prescriptions, obtains or attempts to obtain high-risk drugs.

Article 381-6

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of ten million (10,000,000) to fifty million (50,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who in any manner whatsoever and by any means, causes a person to consume high-risk drugs without their knowledge.

Article 381-7

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs anyone who transfers or offers high-risk drugs to a person for their personal consumption.

CHAPITRE 2 : DRUGS AT RISK

Article 382-1

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of five million (5,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who contravenes the legislative and regulatory provisions concerning the cultivation, production, transformation, import, export, offer, putting on sale, distribution, brokerage, sale, delivery on any basis whatsoever, sending, dispatch, transport, purchase and possession of drugs at risk.
In the event of offer or transfer to a person for their personal consumption, or in the event of use or possession for purposes of personal consumption, the imprisonment is two to five years and the fine five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 382-2

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs anyone who: facilitates for another person, the illicit use of drugs at risk, for consideration or free of charge either by providing premises for this purpose, or by any other means. This applies notably to owners, managers, directors, operators in any capacity whatsoever, of a hotel, furnished house, boarding house, club, circle, dance hall, any place of entertainment open to the public or used by the public or any other place, who tolerate the use of drugs at risk in said establishments or their annexes or in said places. Fraudulent intent is presumed in the event of a positive check by a police service;
issues prescriptions of complaisance for drugs at risk; knowing the fictitious or complaisance nature of the prescriptions, dispenses drugs at risk; by means of fictitious or complaisance prescriptions, obtains or attempts to obtain drugs at risk.

Article 382-3

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of five million (5,000,000) to twenty-five million (25,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, in any manner whatsoever and by any means causes a person to consume drugs at risk without their knowledge.

CHAPITRE 3 : PRECURSORS

Article 383-1

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of five million (5,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who produces, manufactures, imports, exports, transports, offers, sells, distributes, delivers on any basis whatsoever, dispatches, purchases, sends or possesses precursors, equipment and materials, either with the aim of using them in or for the illicit cultivation, production or manufacture of drugs, or knowing that these precursors, equipment or materials must be used for such purposes.

CHAPTER 4: PROVISIONS COMMON TO ALL DRUGS

Article 384-1

Is punished by imprisonment of eleven to twenty-one years and a fine of fifty million (50,000,000) to one hundred million (100,000,000) CFA francs anyone who: facilitates by any fraudulent means the false justification of the origin of the resources or property of the perpetrator of the offenses provided for in this section;
knowingly provides assistance in any operation of placement, conversion or concealment of the proceeds or reconverts into the national economy the resources acquired through the commission of these offenses; acquires, holds or uses gains and resources, knowing that they come from one of the offenses listed in the preceding paragraphs.

Article 384-2

When serious indications suggest that a person is transporting drugs concealed in their body, judicial police officers and customs officials authorized to establish the offense may subject them to medical screening examinations.
Is punished by a sentence of imprisonment of three months to one year and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, any person against whom there exist serious indications suggesting that they could be transporting drugs concealed in their body who refuses to submit to the medical screening examination.

Article 384-3

Anyone who by any means incites the commission of one of the offenses provided for in Articles 381-1 to 383-1 of this law, even if this incitement has not been followed by effects, is punished by the penalties provided for the offense.

Article 384-4

The attempt of one of the offenses provided for in Articles 381-1 to 383-1 of this law is punished as the completed offense.
The same applies to the agreement or association formed with a view to committing one of these offenses.

Article 384-5

Financial operations relating to one of the offenses provided for in Articles 381-1 to 383-1 of this law are punished as the offense itself.

Article 384-6

The penalties provided for in Articles 381-1 to 383-1 of this law may be pronounced even when the various acts constituting the elements of the offense were accomplished in different countries.

CHAPTER 5

PROVISIONS RELATING TO THE ABUSE OF NARCOTICS AND PSYCHOTROPIC SUBSTANCES

Article 385-1

The use without medical prescription of drugs under control is prohibited on the national territory. Any drug found in the possession of a person who uses it unlawfully is seized and confiscated by court decision, even if said person is not subject to prosecution.

Article 385-2

Notwithstanding the provisions of Articles 381-1 to 383-1 of this law, anyone who, unlawfully, purchases, holds or cultivates plants or substances classified as narcotics or psychotropic substances, the small quantity of which allows them to be considered as intended for their personal consumption is punished: if it is a plant or substance classified as a high-risk drug including cannabis oil, by a sentence of imprisonment of one month to one year and a fine of two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs; if it is a derivative of the cannabis plant other than cannabis oil, by a sentence of imprisonment of one to six months and a fine of two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs; if it is a plant or substance classified as a risk drug, by a sentence of imprisonment of fifteen days to three months and a fine of two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs.
The person concerned may be exempted from penalty or from its execution: if they have not reached the age of criminal majority; if they are not in a state of recidivism.

Article 385-3

Any person who drives a land, river, or air motor vehicle under the influence of a drug, even in the absence of any external sign of this unlawfully consumed drug, is punished by a sentence of imprisonment of one to three years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.
Any person who refuses to submit to screening tests and verifications is punished by the penalties provided for in the preceding paragraph.
When there is reason to apply the provisions relating to homicide and involuntary injuries, the penalties provided for in the first paragraph are doubled.

CHAPTER 6: PROVISION TO MINORS OF TOXIC CHEMICAL INHALANTS

Article 386-1

Is punished by a sentence of imprisonment of two to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, knowingly, provides to a minor one of the toxic chemical inhalants appearing on the list established by the minister responsible for health.

CHAPTER 7: PENALTY REGIME

Section 1: Causes of aggravation, exemption and mitigation of penalties

Article 387-1

The maximum penalties provided for in Articles 381-1 to 384-5 of this law are doubled when: the perpetrator of the offense belongs to an organized gang or a criminal association; the perpetrator of the offense participated in other illegal activities facilitated by the commission of the offense; the perpetrator of the offense used violence or weapons;
the perpetrator of the offense exercises a public function and the offense is committed in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of their functions; the offense is committed by a health professional or by a person responsible for combating drug abuse or illicit trafficking; the drug is delivered or offered, or its use is facilitated to a minor, or a mentally disabled person or a person undergoing detoxification treatment; a minor or a mentally disabled person participated in the offense; the drugs delivered cause death or seriously compromise the health of one or more persons; the offense is committed in a penitentiary establishment, a military establishment, an educational or training establishment, a hospital or care establishment, a social services center or in other places where schoolchildren or students engage in educational, sports or social activities, or in the immediate vicinity of these establishments and these places, as well as in places of worship; the perpetrator of the offense added to the drugs substances that aggravate the dangers; the perpetrator of the offense is in a state of recidivism.
Convictions pronounced abroad are taken into consideration for the establishment of recidivism.

Article 387-2

Any person guilty of participation in an association or an agreement with a view to committing one of the offenses provided for in Articles 381-1 to 383-1 of this law is exempted from penalties if, having revealed the existence of this association or agreement to the judicial authority, they thus make it possible to avoid the realization of the offense and/or the identification of the other persons involved.

Article 387-3

Apart from the cases provided for in the preceding article, any person who is the perpetrator or accomplice of one of the offenses listed in Articles 381-1 to 383-1 of this law who, before any prosecution allows or facilitates the identification of the other

guilty parties or after the commencement of prosecution allows or facilitates the arrest of the latter, shall be punished by half of the penalties provided for in said articles.
However, said person is also exempted from the fine and where applicable, from accessory measures and optional complementary penalties.

Section 2: Penalties and Accessory or Complementary Measures Article 387-4

In all cases provided for in Articles 381-1 to 383-1 of this Act, the courts shall order the confiscation of seized plants and substances, which shall be destroyed or handed over to an authorized body for their lawful use.

Article 387-5

In all cases provided for in Articles 381-1 to 383-1 of this Act, the courts shall order the confiscation of installations, materials, equipment and other movable property used or intended to be used for the commission of the offence, to whomever they belong, unless the owners establish that they were unaware of their fraudulent use.

Article 387-6

In all cases provided for in Articles 381-1 to 383-1 of this Act, the courts shall order the confiscation of the proceeds of the offence, movable or immovable property into which the proceeds are transformed or converted and, up to their value, lawfully acquired property with which the said proceeds are mixed, as well as income and other benefits derived from such proceeds, property into which they are transformed or invested or property with which they are mixed, to whomever such proceeds and property belong, unless the owners establish that they were unaware of their fraudulent origin.

Article 387-7

In the cases provided for in Articles 381-1 to 384-5 of this Act, the courts may impose: permanent prohibition from the territory or prohibition from staying in the territory for a period of ten years or more against any convicted foreigner;
prohibition from staying for a period of two to five years if the offence is a misdemeanour and five to twenty years if the offence is a felony;	prohibition from leaving the national territory for a period of six months to three years;	prohibition of civil, civic and family rights for a period of six months to three years;	prohibition from driving land, river and air motor vehicles and withdrawal of permits or licences for a period of six months to three years;	permanent prohibition or prohibition for a period of six months to three years from exercising the profession in connection with which the offence was committed;	confiscation of all or part of the lawfully acquired property of the convicted person, whatever its nature, movable or immovable, divided or undivided.
In the cases provided for in the first paragraph of Article 381-5 of this Act, the courts may order the confiscation of utensils, materials and furniture with which the premises were furnished or decorated.
In the cases provided for in Articles 381-1 to 382-3 and 384-3 of this Act, the courts may order the closure for a period of six months to three years of hotels, furnished houses, boarding houses, drinking establishments, restaurants, clubs, circles, dance halls, entertainment venues or their annexes, or any places open to the public or used by the public or any other place where these offences were committed by the operator or with his complicity.

Article 387-8

Without prejudice to provisions providing for more severe penalties, anyone who contravenes one of the prohibitions listed in Article 387-7 above or the closure of the establishment provided for in paragraph 3 of the same article shall be punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to three years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 387-9

When a drug addict is convicted of one of the offences provided for in Articles 381-1, 384-5, 385-1 to 385-3 of this Act, the court may, in replacement of or in addition to the sentence, order treatment or care measures appropriate to his condition. A regulatory text shall establish the procedures for implementing these measures.

Section 3: Special Provision Article 387-10

The classification of different drugs is determined by law.

BOOK IV: INTERNATIONAL CRIMES

TITLE I: WAR CRIMES

Article 411-1

For the purposes of this title, war crimes means offences committed against persons or property during an international or non-international armed conflict and in connection with that conflict, in violation of the laws and customs of war or international conventions applicable to armed conflicts.
These include in particular:	serious violations of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949;	other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable to international armed conflicts within the established framework of international law;	serious violations of Article 3 common to the four Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 in the case of an armed conflict not of an international character;	other serious violations of the laws and customs applicable to armed conflicts not of an international character.

CHAPTER 1

WAR CRIMES COMMON TO INTERNATIONAL AND NON-INTERNATIONAL ARMED CONFLICTS

Article 411-2

Wilful attacks on life, the infliction of great suffering, attacks on physical integrity or health, torture or inhuman treatment including biological experiments, attacks on the dignity of the person including humiliating and degrading treatment, when committed against a person protected by the law of armed conflicts, shall be punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 411-3

Anyone who intentionally directs attacks against the civilian population as such or against civilians not taking direct part in hostilities and which result in death or serious injury to physical integrity or seriously endanger their health shall be punished by a term of life imprisonment.

Article 411-4

Rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual violence, committed against protected persons, shall be punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.
Where the acts committed have resulted in death or serious injury to physical integrity or health, the penalty shall be life imprisonment.

Article 411-5

Anyone who subjects persons of another party to the conflict who have fallen into his power to mutilations or to medical or scientific experiments of any kind which are neither justified by medical, dental or hospital treatment, nor carried out in the interest of those persons, and which cause death or seriously endanger their health, shall be punished by a term of life imprisonment.

Article 411-6

Anyone who conscripts or enlists minors into the armed forces or armed groups or uses them to participate actively in hostilities shall be punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs; this provision does not preclude the voluntary enlistment of minors over fifteen years of age in the national armed forces.

Article 411-7

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, whoever intentionally directs attacks against: buildings, equipment, medical units and means of transport, and personnel using, in accordance with international law, the distinctive signs provided for by the Geneva Conventions; personnel, installations, equipment, units or vehicles employed in the context of a humanitarian aid or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, insofar as they are entitled to the protection that the international law of armed conflicts guarantees to civilians and civilian objects; buildings dedicated to religion, education, art, science or charitable purposes, historic monuments, hospitals and places where the sick and wounded are gathered, provided that such buildings are not military objectives.
When these same offences have resulted in loss of human life or serious harm to physical integrity or health, the penalty is life imprisonment.

Article 411-8

Is punished by a term of life imprisonment, whoever: kills or injures by treachery individuals belonging to the hostile nation or army; declares that no quarter will be given, threatens an adversary therewith or conducts hostilities on the basis of this decision.

Article 411-9

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, whoever: pillages a town or locality, even when taken by assault; destroys or seizes the property of an adversary, unless such destruction or seizure is imperatively demanded by the necessities of the conflict.

Article 411-10

Are punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, the taking of hostages.
When these have resulted in death or serious harm to physical integrity or health, the penalty is life imprisonment.

CHAPITRE 2 : DES CRIMES DE GUERRE PROPRES AUX CONFLITS ARMES INTERNATIONAUX

Article 412-1

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, whoever directs attacks against civilian objects, that is to say objects which are not military objectives as well as the destruction or appropriation of property not justified by military necessity and carried out on a large scale in an unlawful and arbitrary manner.

Article 412-2

Is punished by a term of life imprisonment whoever attacks or bombards, by whatever means, towns, villages, dwellings or buildings which are undefended and which are not military objectives.

Article 412-3

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, whoever, except in cases where the security of civilians or military imperatives so require, takes part either in the transfer, direct or indirect, by an occupying power of parts of its own civilian population into the territory it occupies, or in the deportation or transfer within or outside the occupied territory of all or part of the population of that territory.

Article 412-4

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, whoever improperly uses a flag of truce, the flag or the military insignia and uniform of the enemy or of the United Nations, as well as the distinctive signs provided for by the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949 and their additional protocols and, in so doing, causes loss of human life or serious harm to physical integrity or health.

Article 412-5

Is punished by a term of life imprisonment whoever: employs poison or poisoned weapons; employs asphyxiating, toxic or similar gases as well as all analogous liquids, materials or devices; uses bullets which expand or flatten easily in the human body; employs weapons, projectiles, materials and methods of warfare of a nature to cause superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering or to strike indiscriminately in violation of the international law of armed conflicts.

Article 412-6

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs whoever uses the presence of a civilian or other protected person to render certain points, areas or military forces immune from military operations.

Article 412-7

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, whoever deliberately starves civilians as a method of warfare, by depriving them of objects indispensable to their survival, including by intentionally impeding relief supplies as provided for under the Geneva Conventions.

Article 412-8

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, whoever: declares abolished, suspended or inadmissible in a court of law the rights and actions of nationals of the adverse party; intentionally deprives a protected person of his or her right to a fair and regular trial.

Article 412-9

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, whoever: compels a prisoner of war or a protected person to serve in the forces of the hostile power; compels the nationals of the adverse party to take part in the operations of war directed against their own country even if they were in the service of the belligerent power before the commencement of the war.

Article 412-10

Is punished by a term of life imprisonment, whoever intentionally launches an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental loss of life among the civilian population, injury to civilians which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated.

Article 412-11

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, whoever intentionally launches an attack in the knowledge that such attack will cause incidental: damage to civilian objects which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated; widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment which would be clearly excessive in relation to the concrete and direct overall military advantage anticipated.

Article 412-12

Is punished by a term of life imprisonment, whoever kills or injures a combatant who, having laid down his arms or having no longer means of defence, has surrendered at discretion.

CHAPITRE 3 : DES CRIMES DE GUERRE PROPRES AUX CONFLITS ARMES NON INTERNATIONAUX

Article 413-1

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, whoever passes sentences and carries out executions without previous judgment pronounced by a regularly constituted court, affording all the judicial guarantees which are recognized as indispensable.

Article 413-2

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who orders the displacement of the civilian population for reasons related to the conflict, except in cases where the security of civilians or military imperatives require it.

Article 413-3

The provisions of this chapter apply to offences committed in the context of an armed conflict, that is to say, a conflict which opposes either the armed forces of at least two States (international armed conflict), or in a prolonged manner on the national territory the governmental authorities and organized armed groups or, organized armed groups among themselves (non-international armed conflict). It does not therefore apply to other situations of internal troubles and tensions such as riots, isolated and sporadic acts of violence or acts of a similar nature.

TITLE II

OF THE CRIME OF GENOCIDE AND THE CRIME AGAINST HUMANITY CHAPTER 1: OF THE CRIME OF GENOCIDE

Article 421-1

Constitutes a genocide punished by a term of life imprisonment any one of the following acts committed with intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical, racial or religious group or a group determined on the basis of any other arbitrary criterion: murder; serious injury to physical or mental integrity; deliberately inflicting on the group conditions of life calculated to bring about its physical destruction in whole or in part; measures intended to prevent births; forcible transfer of children.

CHAPTER 2: OF THE CRIME AGAINST HUMANITY

Article 422-1

Constitutes a crime against humanity and punished by a term of life imprisonment, the fact for anyone to commit any one of the following acts in execution of a concerted plan as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population: murder; extermination; enslavement; deportation or forcible transfer of population; imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in violation of fundamental provisions of international law; torture; rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization, or any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity; persecution against any identifiable group or collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious, gender or other grounds that are universally recognized as impermissible under international law; enforced disappearances; the crime of apartheid; other inhumane acts of a similar character intentionally causing great suffering, or serious injury to physical integrity or to physical or mental health.

Article 422-2

The perpetrators of the offences defined in this title also incur the following penalties: confiscation of the proceeds, property and assets derived directly or indirectly from the crime, without prejudice to the rights of third parties in good faith; prohibition from the territory which may not exceed five years.

BOOK V: CRIMES AND OFFENCES AGAINST PERSONS

TITLE I: INTENTIONAL ATTACKS ON THE PHYSICAL INTEGRITY OF THE PERSON

CHAPTER 1: OF TRAFFICKING IN PERSONS AND ILLICIT TRAFFICKING IN MIGRANTS

Section 1: Of trafficking in persons and related practices Article 511-1

For the purposes of this section, trafficking in persons means the recruitment, transportation, harbouring or reception of persons, by means of the threat or use of force or other forms of coercion, by abduction, fraud, deception, abuse of authority or of a position of vulnerability, or by the giving or receiving of payments or benefits to achieve the consent of a person having control over another person, for the purpose of exploitation.
Exploitation includes, in particular, the exploitation of the prostitution of others or other forms of sexual exploitation, forced labour or services, slavery or practices similar to slavery, servitude or the removal of organs.

Article 511-2

Constitutes the offence of trafficking in persons: the recruitment, transportation, transfer, harbouring or reception of a minor for the purpose of exploitation, even if none of the means set out in Article 511-1 above is used.

Article 511-3

The consent of a victim of trafficking in persons as defined in Article 511-1 above does not eliminate the offence.

Article 511-4

Is guilty of trafficking in persons and punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who commits one of the acts provided for in Articles 511-1 and 511-2 above.

Article 511-5

The term of imprisonment is eleven years to twenty-one years and the fine two million (2,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, when the offence has been committed with one of the following aggravating circumstances: if the victim is a minor of at most fifteen years; if the person is particularly vulnerable due to a physical or mental deficiency, or their state of pregnancy, their advanced age or their state of health; if the act was committed by fraud or violence, by use of false capacity, false title or falsified or altered documents or false authorization; if the perpetrator uses narcotics or any other substance likely to alter the will of the victim; if the perpetrator is carrying a visible or concealed weapon; if the perpetrator is an ascendant or a person having authority over the victim; if the victim has been sequestered, deprived of food or exposed in a public or private place of recruitment; if the victim is exposed to dangerous, arduous work or the worst forms of child labour; if the perpetrator has committed sexual abuse on the victim.

Article 511-6

The penalty is life imprisonment when: the victim has died; the victim has suffered mutilation or permanent disability; the trafficking was for the purpose of organ removal.

Article 511-7

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to six months,

.

Article 511-8

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to one year, any beggar,
: using threats; simulating wounds or infirmities; ; entering a dwelling or its outbuildings without authorization of the owner or occupants; gathering, unless it be husband and wife, the infirm person and their guide.

Article 511-9

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to three years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs,

Article 511-10

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to two years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs,
hands over to individuals who incite or employ them to begging.
If it concerns the father and mother, the forfeiture of parental authority provided for by the provisions of the code of persons and the family may be pronounced.

Article 511-11

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs,

Article 511-12

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to two years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who induces a minor to leave the home of their parents, guardian or employer or encourages their delinquency.

Article 511-13

means any person who organizes or trains or diverts a person to deliver them to begging, exerts pressure on a person to beg or continue to do so, is accompanied by one or more young children with a view to deriving directly or indirectly a financial, material or any other advantage.

Article 511-14

Is guilty of exploitation of the begging of others and punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs any person who commits one of the following acts: organizes the begging of others with a view to deriving profit therefrom; derives profit from the begging of others, shares the benefits or receives subsidies from a person habitually engaged in begging; recruits, trains or diverts a person with a view to delivering them to begging, or to exert pressure on them to beg or continue to do so; recruits, trains or diverts, for purposes of personal enrichment, a person with a view to delivering them to the performance of a service in return for a donation on the public highway.
Is assimilated to the exploitation of the begging of others the fact of being unable to justify resources corresponding to one's lifestyle while exercising a de facto influence, permanent or not, over one or more persons engaged in begging or being in habitual contact with that person or those persons.

Article 511- 15

The maximum penalties provided for in Article 511-14 above are pronounced when the offense is committed against: a minor; a person particularly vulnerable by reason of a physical or mental deficiency, their state of pregnancy, their advanced age or their state of health; a person subjected to begging by constraint, violence or fraudulent maneuvers.
The attempt to exploit the begging of others is punishable.

Article 511-16

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, any beggar referred to in Articles 511-7 and 511-8 above who is found in possession of weapons, instruments or objects suitable for committing crimes or offenses.

Article 511-17

There may in addition be pronounced against the perpetrators of the offenses of begging and exploitation of the begging of others, a prohibition on residence for a period which may not exceed five years.

Section 2: Illicit trafficking in migrants Article 511-18

Illicit trafficking in migrants means the act by any person or group of persons of organizing the transport by land, sea or air, the accommodation or transit of migrants without satisfying the legal conditions for crossing borders in order to derive directly or indirectly a financial, material or any other advantage and that the national territory serves as a zone of origin, transit or destination.
Illicit trafficking in migrants is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of five million (5,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 511-19

Is punished by the same penalties, fraud or falsification, counterfeiting of visas, documents or travel documents or any other documents attesting to the status of resident or national of Burkina Faso or of a foreign country or granting the benefit of refugee, stateless person, displaced person or victim of trafficking in human beings status.

Article 511-20

The penalty is imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of five million (5,000,000) to twenty million (20,000,000) CFA francs, when the offense is committed with a single one of the following circumstances: the act of endangering or risking endangering the life or safety of the migrants concerned; the act of subjecting the migrants to inhuman or degrading treatment, including their exploitation.

Article 511-21

The court seized of an offense referred to in this chapter, orders in addition, in the judgment or decision of conviction: the confiscation of the means of commission of the offense as well as the proceeds of the offense; the destruction of titles, travel documents and identification documents having facilitated the commission of the offense; the permanent withdrawal of license, approval or any other authorization or administrative document from any entity whatever its legal form or from any person whose activity has favored the commission of the offense.

Section 3: Protection of victims and witnesses Article 511-22

In the cases provided for in Article 511-21 above, the court seized may in addition pronounce the prohibition on residence and/or the temporary prohibition on exercising certain civic, civil or family rights.

Article 511-23

Any person having taken part in an association or an agreement with a view to committing one of the offenses referred to in this chapter is exempted from penalty if, having revealed the existence of this association or agreement to the judicial authority, they thus allow the identification of the other persons involved and/or to prevent the realization of the offense.

Article 511-24

For the protection of the identity and private life of victims and witnesses, the trial courts may order in camera proceedings.
The trial court may dispense victims or witnesses from appearing at the hearing or take useful measures for the protection of their identity and their private life.

Article 511-25

Victims of foreign nationality of the offenses referred to in this chapter may request their retention on the national territory on a temporary or permanent basis.

Article 511-26

Victims of the offenses referred to in this chapter, when they present particular vulnerability or are minors, are assisted before the courts of investigation and trial by a lawyer of their choice or appointed ex officio.

Article 511-27

For the exercise of the civil action, the public prosecutor may require the placement under guardianship or legal administration of minor victims whose legal representative is not known or does not present guarantees of safeguarding the rights and well-being of the child.

Article 511-28

There is instituted, by decree taken in the Council of Ministers, a national body for vigilance and surveillance in matters of combating trafficking in persons and related practices.

CHAPTER 2: SERIOUS VIOLATIONS OF LIFE OR PERSONAL INTEGRITY

Section 1: Torture and related practices

Paragraph 1: Punishment of torture and related practices Article 512-1

For the purposes of this section, the following definitions apply: State agent: one of the following persons, whether exercising their powers in Burkina Faso or abroad:
•	a civil servant or any other person entrusted with a public service mission;
•	a member of the security or defense forces;
•	any person vested with a public or elective mandate. practices related to torture: acts or omissions constituting cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment or treatment which are not acts of torture within the meaning of bullet point 3 of this article but which are committed by a State agent or any other person acting in an official capacity or at their instigation or with their express or tacit consent, including arbitrary arrest and detention. torture: any act or omission by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical or mental, is intentionally inflicted on a person for purposes such as obtaining from them or a third person information or confessions, punishing them for an act they or a third person has committed or is suspected of having committed, intimidating or coercing them or intimidating or coercing a third person, or for any reason based on discrimination of any kind, when such pain or suffering is inflicted by a State agent or any other person acting in an official capacity or at their instigation or with their express or tacit consent.

Article 512-2

Any person guilty of acts of torture or related practices is punished by a term of imprisonment of three years to five years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs.

Article 512-3

Any person who commits torture or related practices in the following circumstances is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs: if the victim is under eighteen years of age; if the victim had a disability at the time of the acts; if the victim is a pregnant woman; if the victim is an elderly person; if it resulted in temporary disability.

Article 512-4

The perpetrator of torture or related practices with at least one of the following circumstances is punished by life imprisonment: if it resulted in the death of the victim; if the acts were committed during armed conflicts or internal disturbances; if the acts resulted in permanent disability.

Paragraph 2: Miscellaneous provisions Article 512-5

Burkinabè courts have jurisdiction to try and punish any person who commits an act of torture if: the act is committed on the territory of Burkina Faso; the act is committed on board a vessel registered under Burkinabè law or in respect of which a permit or identification number has been issued in accordance with such law; the act is committed on board an aircraft, either registered in Burkina Faso or leased without crew and operated by a person meeting the conditions to be the owner of an aircraft in Burkina Faso; the alleged perpetrator has Burkinabè nationality; the complainant or victim has Burkinabè nationality; the alleged perpetrator of the acts is in Burkina Faso after the commission of the acts.

Article 512-6

The competent authorities shall take measures to ensure the protection of the complainant and witnesses against any ill-treatment or intimidation.

Article 512-7

The victim is entitled to fair and adequate reparation and compensation, including the means necessary for their fullest possible rehabilitation. In the event of death of the victim resulting from an act of torture or related practices, the victim's beneficiaries are entitled to compensation.
Notwithstanding any criminal proceedings, the State has the obligation to provide reparation to victims.

Article 512-8

Any person who by action, inaction, refusal to act or any other means obstructs or attempts to obstruct the accomplishment of the missions assigned to the National Observatory for the Prevention of Torture and Other Related Practices, hereinafter referred to as the Observatory, established by Article 20 of Law No. 022-2014/AN on the prevention and punishment of torture and related practices, is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to two years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 512-9

Any person who exerts or attempts to exert pressure, intimidation, threats, reprisals, violence on persons who have provided or are suspected of having provided true or false information or of having cooperated with the Observatory is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 512-10

Any person who, being informed of acts of torture or related practices in a place under their responsibility or within their jurisdiction, does not inform the Observatory is punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to one year and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs.

Section 2

Intentional violations of life, intentional violations of physical integrity and harm to health

Paragraph 1: Intentional violations of life Article 512-11

Homicide committed intentionally is classified as murder.
Any murder committed with premeditation or ambush is classified as assassination.

Article 512-12

The murder of biological or adoptive father or mother or any other legitimate or biological ancestor is classified as parricide.

Article 512-13

Infanticide is the murder or assassination of a newborn child.
A child is considered newborn until the expiration of the period prescribed for birth registration.

Article 512-14

The act of attempting to take the life of a person by means of substances that can cause death, in whatever manner such substances have been used or administered and whatever the consequences, is classified as poisoning.

Article 512-15

The perpetrator of assassination, parricide, poisoning or infanticide is punished by life imprisonment.
Any person guilty of a murder committed for purposes of cannibalism, worship, occult practices or commerce is also punished by life imprisonment.
However, the mother, as principal perpetrator or accomplice in the assassination or murder of her newborn child, is punished in the first case by life imprisonment and in the second case by imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years, but this provision may not apply to her co-perpetrators or accomplices.

Article 512-16

Murder is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven to thirty years.

Article 512-17

Is punished by a sentence of life imprisonment any perpetrator of murder committed with one of the following aggravating circumstances: the victim is a minor under fifteen years of age; the murder is preceded or accompanied by rape, torture or acts of barbarity;
the murder is committed against a magistrate, an official of the national police, a military member of the gendarmerie, a member of the prison administration staff or any other person holding public authority, during the exercise of or by reason of their functions; the murder is preceded, accompanied or followed by another crime; the purpose of the murder is either to prepare or facilitate an offence, or to favour the flight or ensure the impunity of the perpetrator or accomplice of an offence.

Paragraphe 2

Intentional attacks on physical integrity Sub-paragraph 1: Intentional violence

Article 512-18

Is punished by a sentence of imprisonment from two months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs anyone who, intentionally, inflicts injuries or strikes blows, or commits any other violence or assault, if such violence has resulted in an illness or total incapacity for personal work of more than seven days and less than twenty-one days.
If there has been premeditation or ambush, the imprisonment is the maximum of the penalty prescribed in the preceding paragraph.

Article 512-19

Is punished by a sentence of imprisonment from two months to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs anyone who, intentionally, inflicts injuries or strikes blows, or commits any other violence or assault, if such violence has resulted in an illness or total incapacity for personal work of seven days or less and if there has been premeditation or ambush or when the acts were committed publicly.

Article 512-20

Is punished by a sentence of imprisonment from two years to seven years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, any perpetrator

of injuries or blows or other violence or assault that causes an illness or total incapacity for personal work of twenty-one days or more.

Article 512-21

Is punished by a sentence of imprisonment from two years to ten years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, any perpetrator of intentional blows and injuries and assault having resulted in mutilations, amputations or deprivation of the use of a limb, blindness, loss of an eye or other permanent infirmities.
If the blows struck or injuries inflicted intentionally have resulted in death without intention to cause it, the perpetrator is punished by a sentence of imprisonment from seven years to ten years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 512-22

The penalty is life imprisonment, when the blows and injuries, violence and assault are carried out with premeditation or ambush and if they have resulted in mutilations, amputation or deprivation of the use of a limb, blindness or loss of an eye or other permanent infirmities.

Article 512-23

Anyone who intentionally inflicts injuries or strikes blows against an ascendant, their adoptive father or mother is punished: by a sentence of imprisonment from two months to two years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs if the injuries or blows have caused no illness or incapacity or if they have resulted in a total incapacity for personal work of seven days or less; by a sentence of imprisonment from two years to five years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs if the blows and injuries have caused a total incapacity for personal work of more than seven days and less than twenty-one days;
by a sentence of imprisonment from five years to ten years, if the blows and injuries have caused a total incapacity for work of at least twenty-one days; by a sentence of imprisonment from ten years to twenty years, if the violence described above is followed by mutilations, amputations or deprivation of the use of a limb; by a sentence of life imprisonment if the blows struck or injuries inflicted intentionally without intention to cause death have nevertheless caused it.
In all cases of premeditation or ambush, the maximum penalty is pronounced.

Article 512-24

Is punished by a sentence of imprisonment from one year to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who participates in a brawl, rebellion or seditious gathering during which violence is carried out having resulted in death without intention to cause it, unless they incur a more severe penalty as perpetrator of said violence.

Article 512-25

Is punished by a sentence of imprisonment from three months to five years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who participates in a brawl, rebellion or seditious gathering during which blows are struck or injuries inflicted, unless they incur a more severe penalty as perpetrator of said violence.

Article 512-26

In the cases provided for in articles 512-24 and 512-25 above, the leaders, perpetrators, instigators and provokers of the brawl, rebellion or seditious gathering are punished as if they had personally committed said violence.

Sub-paragraph 2: Other attacks on physical integrity Article 512-27:
Is punished by a sentence of imprisonment from eleven years to thirty years, anyone who commits the crime of castration.
If death has resulted, the perpetrator is punished by a sentence of life imprisonment.

Article 512-28

The act of provoking or assisting the suicide of another is punished by a sentence of imprisonment from one year to five years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, when the provocation has been followed by suicide or an attempted suicide.
The sentence of imprisonment is from three years to five years and the fine from one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs when the victim of the offence defined in the preceding paragraph is a minor of fifteen years or less.
Natural or legal persons guilty of the offence provided for in this article also incur the additional penalty of prohibition from carrying out the activity of vocational training provider within the meaning of the labour code for a period not exceeding five years.
Propaganda or advertising, whatever the mode, in favour of products, objects or methods recommended as means of causing one's own death is punished by a sentence of imprisonment from one year to three years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.
Sub-paragraph 3: Harm to health and related offences Article 512-29:
Is seropositive any person having a presence of HIV or anti-HIV antibodies in their body at the time of screening test.

Article 512-30

Is punished by a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, having knowledge of their serological status, refrains from informing their spouse or sexual partner.

Article 512-31

Any person who, knowing their HIV-positive status, refrains from informing their spouse or sexual partner and contaminates them is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.
If death results from this contamination, the perpetrator incurs a term of imprisonment of eleven to thirty years.
If the contamination results from rape, the perpetrator incurs a term of imprisonment of eleven to thirty years.

Article 512-32

Any person who knowingly transmits or attempts to transmit HIV to any other person by any means whatsoever is punished by a term of imprisonment of three years to ten years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to twenty million (20,000,000) CFA francs. If contamination of at least two persons results, the penalty is life imprisonment.

Article 512-33

Any person who causes another person an illness or incapacity for personal work by administering to them, in any manner whatsoever, knowingly but without intent to cause death, substances harmful to health is punished by a term of imprisonment of two years to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.
Where an illness or total incapacity for personal work of twenty-one days or more results, the penalty is imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.
Where the substances administered cause either an apparently incurable illness, or the loss of use of an organ, or a permanent infirmity, the term of imprisonment is five years to ten years and the fine is five million (5,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.

Where they cause death without intent to cause it, the penalty is imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of ten million (10,000,000) to twenty million (20,000,000) CFA francs.
In all the cases provided for in paragraphs 2, 3 and 4 above, the court seized may also order the prohibition from exercising family rights, the prohibition from residence and/or the professional prohibition for a period that may not exceed five years.

Article 512-34

Where the acts specified in Article 512-33 above are committed by an ascendant, descendant, spouse or successor of the victim or a person having authority over them or having custody of them, the terms of imprisonment are increased to:	two years to five years in the case provided for in paragraph 1;	five years to ten years in the case provided for in paragraph 2;	eleven years to twenty-one years in the case provided for in paragraph 3;	eleven years to thirty years in the case provided for in paragraph 4.
The court seized may also order the prohibition from exercising family rights for a period of between five years and ten years.

Paragraphe 3 : Des dispositions diverses Article 512-35

The attempt of the offences provided for in Articles 512-18 to 512-28 above is punishable.

Article 512-36

Murder, injuries and blows are excusable if they are provoked by serious blows or violence against persons.

Article 512-37

Murder, injuries and blows are excusable if they are committed in repelling during the day the scaling or breaking of enclosures, walls or entry of an inhabited house or apartment or their outbuildings.

Article 512-38

Murder committed or blows struck or injuries inflicted by one spouse on the other as well as on their accomplice at the moment when they are caught in the act of adultery at the conjugal home are excusable.

Article 512-39

The crime of castration is excusable if it was immediately provoked by an indecent assault committed with violence or by rape.

Article 512-40

Injuries and blows are excusable when they are committed on the person of an adult caught in the act of indecent assault carried out with or without violence on a child under thirteen years of age.

Article 512-41

The excuses provided for in Articles 512-36 to 512-40 above are mitigating excuses.

Article 512-42

Parricide is not excusable.

Article 512-43

In all the cases provided for in this section, the confiscation of weapons, objects and instruments used to commit the offence is ordered.

CHAPITRE 3 : DES ATTEINTES A L'EGARD DES FEMMES ET DES FILLES

Article 513-1

For the purposes of this chapter, the following are understood as:	violence against women and girls: any act of violence directed against persons of the female sex, and causing or likely to cause women and girls physical, sexual, psychological, moral, economic and cultural harm or suffering including the threat of such acts, whether in public life or in private life;	cultural violence: any harmful and degrading practice against women and girls drawing their justification from customs, traditions and religions;	economic violence: the act of using one's means to slow down or prevent the economic or financial development of any person or the act of preventing any person from enjoying their socio-economic rights;	moral and psychological violence: any behaviour, words and attitude that undermine the personality of the woman or girl, their image, self-esteem and inner balance;	patrimonial violence: any act or negligence affecting the survival of the victim and consisting in transforming, removing, destroying, retaining or misappropriating objects, documents, goods and values, patrimonial rights or economic resources intended to cover their needs and which may extend to damage caused to common or personal property of the victim;	physical violence: any act or behaviour that undermines the physical integrity of the woman or girl;	sexual violence: any sexual assault committed with violence, coercion, threat, on a woman or girl.

Section 1

Du rapt, des sévices, de l'esclavage sexuel, des violences morales à l'égard des femmes et des filles

Article 513-2

Abduction consists of a person forcibly removing a woman or girl with a view to imposing marriage or a union on her without her consent.
Any perpetrator of abduction is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.
Where the perpetrator of the abduction has engaged in sexual abuse or rape on the victim, the penalty is imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 513-3

Sexual abuse or torture consists of introducing a substance into the genital organs of a woman or girl, or applying an object or substance to the breasts of a woman or girl with a view to inflicting burns, lesions or suffering on her.
Any person who commits sexual abuse or torture is punished by a term of imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 513-4

The offence of sexual slavery consists of compelling a girl or woman by coercion to submit to or engage in various sexual practices.
Any person who commits the offence of sexual slavery is punished by a term of imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 513-5

Constitute moral and psychological violence against a girl or a woman: any statement or attitude, whether or not accompanied by physical aggression, the objective of which is to harm the self-esteem of the woman or girl, to denigrate her and reduce the victim to a state of helplessness or submission; gestures, words, writings, by which an indecent or malicious intention or a manifest will to cause material damage, to injure or to kill the woman or girl is signified; infringement of the rights to sexual health and reproductive health of the woman or young girl, limitation of the enjoyment of these rights, by means of coercion, blackmail, corruption or manipulation, in particular the prohibition of using contraceptive methods; repudiation or ill-treatment inflicted on a woman who gives birth to a child of a sex not desired by her spouse; ill-treatment inflicted on sterile women; prohibition without reasons based on the interest or stability of the household, from visiting her parents or receiving their visits; prohibition without valid reason from exercising a profession, practicing an income-generating activity, an associative and political activity; unequal treatment of wives in the context of a polygamous marriage.
Is punished by a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, anyone who commits one of the acts referred to in this article.

Article 513-6

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of six hundred thousand (600,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs anyone who chases away, sends away, rejects or inflicts ill-treatment on a girl or a woman accused or suspected of witchcraft.

Section 2: Female genital mutilation Article 513-7

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who harms or attempts to harm the integrity of the female genital organ by ablation, by excision, by infibulation, by desensitization or by any other means.
If death has resulted, the penalty is imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 513-8

The penalties are increased to the maximum if the perpetrator is from the medical or paramedical profession.
The court seized may furthermore pronounce against him the prohibition from exercising his profession for a period which may not exceed five years.

Article 513-9

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who through his public speech, statements or writings, encourages female genital mutilation.

Section 3: Abortion Article 513-10

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, by food, beverages, medicines, maneuvers, violence or by any other means, procures or attempts to procure the abortion of a pregnant woman or woman presumed pregnant, whether she consented to it or not.
The term of imprisonment is five years to ten years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs if the perpetrator habitually engaged in such acts.
If death has resulted, the penalty is imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of five million (5,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.
The penalty is life imprisonment if the perpetrator habitually engaged in such acts.
The court seized may furthermore pronounce professional prohibition and/or prohibition of residence for a period which may not exceed five years.

Article 513-11

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to two years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who contravenes the prohibition from exercising his profession pronounced pursuant to the last paragraph of the preceding article.

Article 513-12

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to two years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs, voluntary termination of pregnancy or the attempt, subject to the cases provided for in the following articles.

Article 513-13

Voluntary termination of pregnancy may at any gestational age be performed if a physician attests after examinations that maintaining the pregnancy endangers the health of the woman or that there is a strong probability that the unborn child will be affected by a disease or infirmity of particular severity recognized as incurable at the time of diagnosis.

Article 513-14

In case of rape or incest, if the materiality of the distress is established by the public prosecutor, the pregnant woman may request from a physician within the first fourteen weeks, the termination of her pregnancy.

Article 513-15

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to two years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, by any means of dissemination or advertising incites abortion.

Article 513-16

In case of conviction for one of the offenses provided for in this section, the court pronounces the confiscation of objects used for the abortion. It may furthermore pronounce the closure of establishment and/or the prohibition from exercising civil and family rights for a period which may not exceed five years.
Any conviction for attempt or complicity in the same offenses entails the same prohibitions.

Article 513-17

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to two years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who contravenes the prohibition with which he is subject pursuant to the preceding article.

Article 513-18

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, in the course of exercising his functions, has knowledge of one of the offenses referred to in this chapter, does not inform the competent judicial or administrative authorities.

Article 513-19

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, by threats of reprisals, obstructs a denunciation on the part of the persons referred to in Article 513-18 above.

CHAPTER 4: ACCUSATION OF WITCHCRAFT

Article 514-1

The accusation of practice of witchcraft is any imputation, to one or more persons, of facts of a magical, abstract, imaginary, supernatural or paranormal nature which cannot be materially or scientifically proven and which is likely to harm the honor, reputation, security or life of such persons.
The material element of the offense is characterized by any fact, any act qualified as charlatanism, occultism, by rites or statements, speeches and cries tending to accuse others of one or more facts of a supernatural or paranormal nature, which cannot be materially or scientifically proven.
The intentional element is deduced from the knowledge of the harmful consequences of the act of accusation on the victim such as dishonor, social exclusion, violence and assault.

Article 514-2

Are accomplices to the offense of accusation of witchcraft practice: those who have provided any means or instrument having served to allegedly detect a person as practicing witchcraft; those who have, with knowledge, aided or assisted the perpetrator or perpetrators of the action in the acts, who prepared, facilitated or consummated it; those who, having had knowledge of occult practices aimed at allegedly detecting persons practicing witchcraft, have not informed the administrative or judicial authorities; those who have harbored persons presumed to be perpetrators or co-perpetrators of the offense; those who have provided support for writings and statements accusing one or more persons of witchcraft practice.

Article 514-3

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, any person found guilty or accomplice of accusation of witchcraft practice.
The term of imprisonment is three to five years in cases where the accusation of witchcraft has given rise to: the social exclusion of the victim; blows, injuries and assault on the victim; damage to movable and immovable property.

In case of death of the victim, the offense is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to two million five hundred thousand (2,500,000) CFA francs.

TITRE II: OTHER OFFENSES AGAINST THE PERSON

CHAPITRE 1

THREATS, RISKS CAUSED TO OTHERS AND FAILURE TO PROVIDE ASSISTANCE

Article 521-1

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, whoever, by any means whatsoever, threatens conditionally with harm to persons constituting an offense that the law punishes with a criminal penalty.

Article 521-2

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, whoever, by any means whatsoever, threatens conditionally with harm to persons that the law punishes with a correctional penalty.
When the threat is made to a magistrate, an officer or agent of judicial police, a public or ministerial officer, an auxiliary of justice, in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of his functions, the penalty is imprisonment of two to five years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) francs to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.
It is the same when the threat is made to a witness, to a victim or to any other person, either with a view to inducing them not to report the facts, not to file a complaint, not to give testimony, or by reason of the report, the complaint or the testimony.

Article 521-3

Are punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to five years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, conditional threats of harm to property that the law punishes with a criminal penalty.

Article 521-4

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two to ten years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, whoever threatens with death by anonymous or signed writing, image, symbol, emblem or any form of expression of death.

Article 521-5

For the purposes of this code, endangering the person of another is the act of deliberately exposing another to death or injury.
Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, the act of endangering the person of another.
The act of directly exposing another to an immediate risk of death or injury of a nature to cause mutilation or permanent disability by the deliberate violation of an obligation of prudence or safety imposed by law or regulation also constitutes endangering the person of another and is punished by the penalties provided for in the preceding paragraph.

Article 521-6

Legal persons declared criminally responsible for the offenses defined in Article 521-5 above incur, in addition to the fine, the complementary sanctions applicable to them, notably the prohibition from exercising the activity that is at the origin of the commission of the offense.

Article 521-7

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, whoever without risk to himself or to third parties, can prevent by his personal action either an act qualified as a crime, or an offense against the bodily integrity of a person, voluntarily refrains from doing so.
Is punished by the same penalties whoever voluntarily refrains from providing to a person in danger the assistance that, without risk to himself or to third parties, he could provide either by his personal action, or by summoning help.

Article 521-8

The act of voluntarily obstructing the arrival of assistance intended to enable a person to escape imminent danger or to combat a disaster presenting a danger to the safety of persons is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to three years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to two million five hundred thousand (2,500,000) francs.

Article 521-9

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to six months and a fine of six hundred thousand (600,000) to two million five hundred thousand (2,500,000) CFA francs, whoever directly exposes another to a risk of death or injury, by the deliberate violation of an obligation expressly imposed on him by laws or regulations.

CHAPTER 2: MANSLAUGHTER AND INVOLUNTARY INJURIES

Article 522-1

The act of causing the death of another person through clumsiness, imprudence, inattention, negligence or failure to observe a law or regulation constitutes involuntary manslaughter.
Anyone who commits involuntary manslaughter is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.
The penalty is imprisonment of one year to seven years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs when the offender acted while intoxicated, committed a hit-and-run offence or attempted by any other means to escape the liability he may incur.
With regard to vehicle drivers, the penalties are also one year to seven years of imprisonment and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs when:	the driver was in a state of intoxication or was under the influence of an alcoholic state characterized by a concentration of alcohol in the blood or in exhaled air equal to or exceeding the rates set by the legislative or regulatory provisions of the road code or other laws and regulations;	the involuntary manslaughter occurred because the driver attempted to escape or refused to submit to a road safety check;	it results from a blood analysis or verification that the driver had used substances or plants classified as narcotics;	the driver did not hold the driving licence required by law or regulation or his licence had been cancelled, invalidated, suspended or withheld;	the driver exceeded the maximum authorized speed;	the driver, knowing that he has just caused or occasioned an accident, did not stop and thus attempted to escape the criminal or civil liability he may incur.
The penalties are imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of six hundred thousand (600,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, when involuntary manslaughter has been committed with several of the circumstances mentioned in this article, concerning drivers.

Article 522-2

Anyone who causes to another person through clumsiness, imprudence, inattention, negligence or failure to observe a law or regulation, injuries, blows, illnesses resulting in total incapacity for work of more than three months is punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to two years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.
The penalties are six months to three years of imprisonment and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs for any vehicle driver when:	he was in a state of intoxication or was under the influence of an alcoholic state characterized by a concentration of alcohol in the blood or in exhaled air equal to or exceeding the rates set by the legislative or regulatory provisions of the road code or other laws and regulations;
the offence occurred because he attempted to escape or refused to submit to a road safety check;	It results from a blood analysis or verification that he had used substances or plants classified as narcotics.

Article 522-3

Anyone who causes to another person through clumsiness, imprudence, inattention, negligence or failure to observe a law or regulation, injuries, blows, illnesses resulting in total incapacity for work of more than three months when the offence has been committed with one of the following circumstances is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to three years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs:	while intoxicated;	in case of hit-and-run offence;	by fraudulently attempting to escape the liability he could incur.

CHAPTER 3

VIOLATIONS OF INDIVIDUAL LIBERTY AND INVIOLABILITY OF THE HOME

Article 523-1

Anyone who, without order from the constituted authorities and outside the cases where the law permits or orders it, abducts, arrests, detains, sequesters a person or knowingly provides a place to detain or sequester a person is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.
If the detention or sequestration lasts more than one month, the penalty is imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 523-2

The maximum penalty provided for in paragraph 2 of Article 523-1 above is pronounced, if the arrest or abduction is carried out either while wearing a uniform or a regulatory or apparently regulatory badge, or under a false name, a false capacity or on a false order from the public authority.
The same penalty is applicable, if the arrest or abduction was carried out with the aid of a motorized means of transport or if the victim was threatened with death.

Article 523-3

The perpetrator is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, if the person abducted, arrested, detained or sequestered has been subjected to torture or bodily abuse.
If the torture resulted in death, the mutilation of an organ or any permanent infirmity, the perpetrator is punished by a term of life imprisonment and a fine of five million (5,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.
The penalties provided for in the preceding paragraph are applicable if the person abducted, arrested, detained or sequestered disappears.

Article 523-4

Anyone who is guilty of enforced disappearance of a person is punished by a term of imprisonment of twenty years to thirty years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to twenty million (20,000,000) CFA francs.
By enforced disappearance of a person is meant the arrest, detention, abduction or any other form of deprivation of liberty of a person or a group of persons, under conditions removing them from the protection of the law, by one or more agents of the State or by a person or a group of persons acting with the authorization, support or acquiescence of the State authorities, who then refuse to acknowledge that these persons are deprived of liberty or to reveal the fate reserved for them or the place where they are located.

Article 523-5

Anyone who, involved in the commission of an enforced disappearance, has effectively contributed to the recovery alive of the disappeared person or enabled the elucidation of cases of enforced disappearance or the identification of the perpetrators of an enforced disappearance benefits from a mitigating excuse.

Article 523-6

Anyone who, by fraud or with the aid of threats or violence against persons or property, enters or attempts to enter the home of another person is punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs.
The term of imprisonment is two years to ten years and the fine one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, if the violation of the home is committed either at night, or with the aid of climbing or breaking in, or by several persons, or with the carrying of a visible or concealed weapon by one or more of the perpetrators.

CHAPTER 4

VIOLATIONS OF HONOUR, CONSIDERATION OF PERSONS AND PRIVATE LIFE

Article 524-1

Any allegation or imputation of a fact that harms the honour or reputation of persons or of the body to which the fact is imputed, is defamation.
The following cannot give rise to prosecution for defamation:	parliamentary debates;	judicial debates;	pronouncements or writings produced before the courts;	the faithful and good faith reporting of these debates and speeches with the exception of defamation trials;
the publication of judicial decisions including those rendered in defamation matters;	the official report made in good faith by a person duly appointed to conduct an inquiry and within the framework of that inquiry;	the imputation made in good faith by a superior or his subordinate;	information given in good faith about a person or a third party who has a personal or official interest in knowing it or who has the power to remedy an alleged injustice;	criticism of a work, a performance, an opinion of any kind publicly expressed provided that such criticism does not constitute a personal attack.

Article 524-2

Any outrageous expression, term of contempt or invective that does not contain the imputation of any fact, is an insult.

Article 524-3

The intentionally false denunciation of a false fact likely to expose the person who is the subject of it to a sanction by the administrative authority or his employer or to judicial proceedings is slanderous.

Article 524-4

Defamation committed by speech, cries or threats uttered in public places or meetings, by writings, printed matter sold or distributed, offered for sale or displayed in public places or meetings by placards or posters displayed to public view, by any other means of dissemination is punished:	by a term of imprisonment of two months to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, if the defamation is committed against:
•	public administrations, constituted bodies, the armed forces, courts and tribunals;
•	one or more members of the government or constituted bodies, any	person	charged	with	a	public	service	or	mandate

temporary or permanent by reason of their functions or capacity and witnesses by reason of their testimony;	by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, if the defamation is committed by means of electronic communication;	by a term of imprisonment of two months to six months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) CFA francs, if the defamation is committed against private individuals.
This article is applicable to defamation directed against the memory of a deceased person when the author of the defamation intended to harm the honour or reputation of the living heirs, spouse or universal legatees.

Article 524-5

Prosecution is initiated upon complaint by the victim or his legal representative.
Until final conviction, withdrawal of the complaint stops the exercise of the public prosecution.
When the truth of the defamatory fact is established, and that fact was committed by a public authority in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of its functions, the perpetrator of the offence is discharged from prosecution.

Article 524-6

Public insult committed against private individuals, by speech, cries or threats uttered in public places or meetings, by writings, printed matter sold or distributed, offered for sale or displayed in public places or meetings by placards or posters displayed to public view, by any other means of dissemination is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to six months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.
This article is applicable to insult made to the memory of a deceased person, when the author of the insult intended to harm the honour or reputation of the living heirs, spouse or universal legatees.

Article 524-7

Anyone who, by any means whatsoever, makes a slanderous denunciation against one or more individuals, to the judicial authorities, to administrative or judicial police officers, or to authorities having the power to follow up on it or to refer the matter to the competent authority, or to the hierarchical superiors or employers of the person denounced is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.
The court seized may, in addition, order the insertion of its decision in whole or in part in one or more newspapers at the expense of the convicted person.
If the fact denounced is liable to criminal or disciplinary sanction, prosecution for slanderous denunciation may be initiated by the victim either after judgment or decision of acquittal or discharge, or after order or decision of no case to answer, or after dismissal of the denunciation by the magistrate, official, superior authority or employer competent to give it the follow-up it was liable to receive.
The court seized is required to stay proceedings if prosecution concerning the fact denounced is pending.

Article 524-8

For the offences referred to in articles 524-1 to 524-7 above, the limitation period for public prosecution is three months from the commission of the acts or the last act of prosecution or investigation.
In the case referred to in paragraph 3 of article 524-7 above, the period runs from the date of the order or decision of no case to answer, the notice of dismissal without further action, the judgment or decision of acquittal or discharge.

Article 524-9

Anyone who, by any means whatsoever, has intentionally infringed the privacy of another person's private life is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs:	by capturing, listening to, recording or transmitting words spoken in a private place by a person without that person's consent;	by fixing, recording or transmitting without that person's consent, the image of a person in a private place.
When the acts set out above have been accomplished in the sight and knowledge of the interested parties without their objecting to it, when they were in a position to do so, their consent is presumed.
The same penalties apply to the act of keeping, bringing or allowing to be brought to the knowledge of the public or of a third party or using in any manner whatsoever any recording or document obtained by means of one of the above acts.
When the offence provided for in the preceding paragraph is committed through the press, the particular provisions of the laws and regulations governing these matters are applicable with regard to the determination of the persons responsible.
In all cases, the court seized may, without prejudice to compensation for the damage suffered, prescribe all measures, such as sequestration, seizure and others, appropriate to prevent or stop an infringement of the privacy of private life; these measures may, if there is urgency, be ordered in summary proceedings.

Article 524-10

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who engages in: the manufacture, importation, possession, display, offer, rental or sale of devices or technical equipment designed to commit the offence provided for in paragraph 1 of Article 524-9 above;
the manufacture, importation, possession, display, offer, rental or sale of devices or technical equipment designed for the remote detection of conversations, enabling the commission of the offence provided for in paragraph 1 of Article 524-9 above or intended for the illegal capture of data;	the manufacture, importation, possession, display, offer, rental or sale of devices or technical equipment designed to intercept, divert, use or disclose, intentionally, correspondence sent, transmitted or received by electronic means or to proceed with the installation of devices designed to carry out such interceptions.

Article 524-11

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who knowingly publishes, by any means whatsoever, a montage made with the words or image of a person, without that person's consent, if it is not evident that it is a montage or if it is not expressly mentioned.

Article 524-12

The attempt of the offences referred to in Articles 524-9 to 524-11 above is punishable.
Public prosecution may only be initiated upon complaint by the victim, their legal representative or their successors in title.
The court may order the confiscation of equipment used to commit the offence, any montage medium, any recording or document obtained using one of the methods provided for in Article 524-9 above.

Article 524-13

The provisions of this chapter do not apply to natural or legal persons falling under the status of the written press, online press and audiovisual press.

CHAPITRE 5 : DE LA VIOLATION DE SECRET

Article 525-1

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to two years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, the disclosure of information of a secret nature by a person who holds it either by status or by profession, or by reason of a function or temporary mission.

Article 525-2

The provisions of Article 525-1 above are not applicable:	in cases where the law requires or authorizes the disclosure of the secret;	to anyone who informs the judicial, medical or administrative authorities of deprivations or abuse, including when it involves sexual assault or mutilation, of which they have become aware and which have been inflicted on a minor or a person who is not able to protect themselves due to their age or physical or psychological incapacity;	to the doctor who, with the victim's consent, brings to the attention of the procureur du Faso the abuse or deprivations that they have observed, physically or psychologically, in the exercise of their profession and which allow them to presume that physical, sexual or psychological violence of any nature has been committed.
When the victim is a minor or a person who is not able to protect themselves due to their age or physical or psychological incapacity, their consent is not necessary;	to health or social work professionals who inform the competent authorities of the dangerous nature to themselves or to others of persons who consult them and whom they know possess a weapon or have expressed their intention to acquire one. Reporting to the competent authorities carried out under the conditions provided for in this article may not be subject to any disciplinary sanction.

Article 525-3

In the event that any person, knowing themselves to be infected with HIV, fails to voluntarily comply with the obligation to inform their spouse, the doctor must ensure that the disclosure is made. Failure to comply with this obligation by the doctor is punished by a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 525-4

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, anyone who, except in the cases provided for in Article 341-8, in bad faith, opens or destroys letters or correspondence addressed to third parties.
Is punished by the same penalties, anyone who, in bad faith:	delays or diverts correspondence that has arrived or not at its destination and addressed to third parties;	fraudulently takes knowledge of the content;	intercepts, diverts, uses or discloses correspondence sent, transmitted or received by electronic means or proceeds with the installation of devices designed to carry out such interceptions.
This article is not applicable to fathers, mothers, guardians or persons responsible with regard to non-emancipated minor children when they act in the interests of the latter.

TITRE III : DES CRIMES ET DELITS CONTRE LA FAMILLE ET LES BONNES MŒURS

CHAPITRE 1 : DES CRIMES ET DELITS CONTRE LA FAMILLE

Section 1 : Des infractions en matière de mariage Article 531-1

For the purposes of this code, marriage means any form of union between a man and a woman, celebrated by a civil registrar or celebrated according to customary or religious rules.

Article 531-2

Is qualified as moral, material or emotional abandonment, in violation of marital obligations and duties of relief and assistance, except by court decision, the act of deserting, for whatever reason, one's spouse.
Also guilty of material, moral or emotional abandonment is anyone who, for the reasons mentioned in the preceding paragraph, deserts:	a woman who is pregnant or menopausal, married according to customary or religious rules or who has had a continuous and stable relationship with her partner;	any person married according to customary or religious rules or who has had a continuous and stable relationship with their partner and whose particular vulnerability, due to their age, illness, infirmity, apparent physical or psychological deficiency or known to its perpetrator.

Article 531-3

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two to six months and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who is guilty of moral, material or emotional abandonment, in violation of marital obligations and duties of relief and assistance.

Article 531-4

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to two years, anyone who forces a person into marriage.
The penalty is imprisonment of one to three years if the victim is a minor. The maximum penalty is incurred if the victim is under thirteen years of age.
Anyone who contracts or facilitates a marriage under such conditions is considered an accomplice.

Article 531-5

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to two years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to nine hundred thousand (900,000) CFA francs, anyone who, being bound by a monogamous marriage, contracts another before the dissolution of that marriage.

Section 2: Domestic Violence

Article 531-8

Domestic violence is that exercised within the context of a relationship between spouses, cohabitants or between ascendants and descendants which is expressed through physical, psychological, sexual, economic and spiritual aggression such as: willful assault and battery; rape; deprivation of food or care; confiscation of civil status documents used for identification of the person; infringements of property rights; serious violations of provisions relating to family rights; infringements of freedom to work and freedom of belief.

Article 531-9

Prosecution for domestic violence is initiated upon complaint by the victim or their legal representative, upon denunciation made to the judicial authorities, or to any competent authority, or ex officio by the public prosecutor.
Anyone who commits an act qualified as domestic violence is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.
The penalty is imprisonment of two months to three years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, when such violence has resulted in an illness or total incapacity for personal work of more than seven days and less than twenty-one days.
When the victim is a minor, a pregnant woman, a disabled person, a legitimate or natural ascendant, or if the violence has resulted in an incapacity for personal work greater than or equal to twenty-one

days, the penalty is imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of six hundred thousand (600,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.
If the death of the victim or permanent disability has resulted, the penalty is life imprisonment.
The court seized may further order the prohibition from exercising civil and/or family rights for a period which may not exceed five years.

Article 531-10

Any person who aids or assists the perpetrator of domestic violence is punished by the same penalties as the perpetrator.
Anyone who has knowledge of acts of domestic violence and who refrains from reporting them to the competent authorities is punished by a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs.

Article 531-11

The act of harassing one's spouse, one's partner, one's cohabitant through repeated actions having the purpose or effect of degrading their living conditions resulting in an alteration of their physical or mental health is punished by a term of imprisonment of two years to four years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs when these acts have caused a total incapacity for work of less than or equal to eight days or have not resulted in any incapacity for work.
The penalty is imprisonment of three years to five years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, when the acts have caused a total incapacity for work exceeding eight days.
The same penalties are incurred when the offense is committed by a former spouse, a former cohabitant of the victim, or a former female partner or former male partner.

Section 3: Family Abandonment

Article 531-12

Anyone who is guilty of moral, material or emotional abandonment, in violation of marital obligations and duties of relief and assistance, is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to six months and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 531-13

The act by the father or mother of a family of abandoning, for more than three months, the family residence and evading, without legitimate reason, their legal obligations to the point of compromising the health, safety, morality or education of their minor child is punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.
This period may only be interrupted by a return to the home implying the intention to permanently resume family life.
The following are punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs: the act, by an ascendant or any other person exercising parental authority or having authority over a minor of fifteen years, of depriving them of food or care to the point of compromising their health; the husband or cohabitant who, knowing his wife or cohabitant to be pregnant, voluntarily abandons her for more than three months without serious or legitimate reason.

Article 531-14

The following are punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs: the act, by a person, of not executing a judicial decision or a judicially approved agreement requiring them to pay for the benefit of a minor child, a descendant, an ascendant or the spouse a pension, a contribution, subsidies or benefits of any nature owed by reason of one of the family obligations provided for by law, by remaining more than two months without fully discharging this obligation; the act, by a person bound to the obligation to pay a pension, a contribution, subsidies or benefits of any nature, of not notifying their change of domicile to the creditor within a period of one month from such change.
In case of recidivism, the penalty of imprisonment is always imposed.

Article 531-15

In addition to the normally competent courts, the court of the residence of the abandoned person or beneficiary of the pension may hear prosecutions brought pursuant to the provisions of articles 531-13 and 531-14 above.
Prosecutions may only be brought upon complaint by the abandoned person or beneficiary of the pension or their legal representative with production of the title invoked. However, they are brought ex officio by the public prosecutor when the perpetrator of the offense is that legal representative.
Prosecutions are preceded by a formal notice to the debtor of the obligation or pension to comply within fifteen days.
This formal notice is carried out at the request of the public prosecutor by a judicial police officer in the form of an interpellation.
If the debtor is a fugitive or has no known domicile, this is mentioned by the judicial police officer and the matter proceeds.

Article 531-16

The father or mother who seriously compromises, through ill-treatment, through pernicious examples of drunkenness or notorious misconduct, through lack of care or through lack of necessary supervision, either the health, or the safety, or the morality of one or more of their children, is punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, whether or not forfeiture of parental authority is pronounced against them.
For the offenses provided for in this section, the court seized may order the prohibition from exercising civic and family rights for a period which may not exceed five years.

CHAPTER 2: OFFENSES AGAINST CHILDREN AND VULNERABLE PERSONS

Section 1

Exposure or Abandonment of Children, Incapacitated Persons or Elderly Persons

Article 532-1

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to three years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to seven million (7,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who exposes or causes to be exposed, abandons or causes to be abandoned in a solitary place a child or an incapacitated person unable to protect himself or herself by reason of his or her physical or mental condition.
If the exposure or abandonment has resulted in an illness, infirmity or total incapacity of twenty-one days or more, the term of imprisonment is two to five years.
If it has resulted in a mutilation or permanent infirmity, the term of imprisonment is increased from five years to ten years.
If the exposure or abandonment has caused death, the term of imprisonment is increased from eleven years to twenty-one years.

Article 532-2

If the perpetrators are the ascendants or any other persons having authority over the child or incapacitated person or having custody thereof, the penalty is:	imprisonment of two years to five years in the case provided for in paragraph 1 of Article 532-1 above;	imprisonment of five years to ten years in the case provided for in paragraph 2 of Article 532-1 above;	imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-five years in the case provided for in paragraph 3 of Article 532-1 above;	life imprisonment in the case provided for in paragraph 4 of Article 532-1 above.

Article 532-3

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who exposes or causes to be exposed, abandons or causes to be abandoned in a non-solitary place a child or an incapacitated person unable to protect himself or herself by reason of his or her physical or mental condition.
If the exposure or abandonment has resulted in an illness or total incapacity of twenty-one days or more, the penalty is imprisonment of six months to two years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.
If the child or incapacitated person has remained mutilated or crippled or if he or she has remained afflicted with a permanent infirmity, the penalty is imprisonment of two years to five years.
If death has resulted therefrom, the penalty is imprisonment of five years to ten years.

Article 532-4

If the perpetrators are the ascendants or any other persons having authority over the child or incapacitated person or having custody thereof, the penalty is:	imprisonment of six months to two years in the case provided for in Article 532-3 paragraph 1 above;
imprisonment of one year to three years in the case provided for in Article 532-3 paragraph 2 above;	imprisonment of five years to ten years in the case provided for in Article 532-3 paragraph 3 above;	imprisonment of eleven years to twenty years in the case provided for in Article 532-3 paragraph 4 above.

Article 532-5

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, voluntarily, inflicts injuries, strikes blows or deprives of food or care a child under fifteen years of age to the point of compromising his or her health.
The term of imprisonment is two years to five years and the fine three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs, if the injuries, blows or deprivation of food or care results in an illness or total incapacity for work of twenty-one days or more, or if there has been premeditation or ambush.
If the perpetrators are the legitimate, natural or adoptive father and mother or other legitimate ascendants or any other persons having authority over the child or having custody thereof, the penalty is:	imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine of six hundred thousand (600,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs when the illness or incapacity for personal work is less than twenty-one days;	imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs in case of illness or total incapacity for personal work of twenty-one days or more, premeditation or ambush.
If the violence or deprivation practiced has caused death without intention to cause it, the penalty is imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years.

If the violence or deprivation is practiced with the intention of causing death, the penalty is life imprisonment.

Article 532-6

For the offenses referred to in this section, the court seized may pronounce the prohibition from exercising civil and/or family rights for a period that may not exceed five years.

Article 532-7

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to three years and a fine of one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, for a lucrative purpose or for any other advantage, provokes or incites the parents or one of them to abandon their child born or unborn or provides or attempts to provide his or her intermediation to have a child born or unborn taken in or adopted.

Article 532-8

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs, anyone who fraudulently benefits from social benefits and assistance intended for an elderly person.

Article 532-9

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of three years to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who fraudulently misappropriates sums of money owed to widowers or widows and/or to orphaned children by way of a pension or the execution of a court decision.

Article 532-10

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to three years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs, anyone who commits abandonment or exclusion from the family environment with regard to an elderly person.
If the perpetrator is a natural or legitimate descendant of the elderly person, the penalty is imprisonment of three years to five years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 532-11

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to three years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to two million five hundred thousand (2,500,000) CFA francs, anyone who commits abuse of the state of ignorance or the situation of weakness, either of a minor, or of a person whose particular vulnerability due to his or her age, an illness, an infirmity, a physical or mental deficiency or a state of pregnancy, is apparent or known to its perpetrator, or of a person in a state of psychological or physical subjection resulting from the exercise of serious or repeated pressure or techniques likely to alter his or her judgment, to lead this minor or this person to an act or an abstention that is seriously prejudicial to him or her.
When the offense is committed by the de facto or de jure leader of a group that pursues activities having the purpose or effect of creating, maintaining or exploiting the psychological or psychic subjection of persons who participate in these activities, the penalty is imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine of six hundred thousand (600,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 532-12

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to six months and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs, any person guilty of exclusion from the family environment with regard to a pregnant girl or who refuses a forced marriage.

Section 2: Offences tending to prevent the identification of a child

Article 532-13

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, knowingly, under conditions likely to make identification impossible, moves a child, conceals them, causes them to disappear or substitutes another child for them or physically presents them as born of a woman who has not given birth or of a man who, obviously, could not be the father.
When the perpetrator of the above-mentioned acts is a health care worker, the penalty is imprisonment of three years to ten years and a fine of three million

(3,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs. In addition, a prohibition from practising the profession may be imposed for a period not exceeding five years.
If it is established that the child did not live, the perpetrator is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to six months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to five hundred thousand (500,000) CFA francs.

Section 3: Abduction and non-presentation of minors

Article 532-14

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who by violence, threats or fraud abducts or causes to be abducted a minor or leads them away, diverts them or moves them or causes them to be led away, diverted or moved from the places where they were placed by authority or to whose direction they were subject or entrusted.

Article 532-15

The penalty is imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs if the minor thus abducted or diverted is under thirteen years of age. However, if the minor is found alive before the conviction decision has been rendered, the term of imprisonment is reduced to five years to ten years.

Article 532-16

The penalty is life imprisonment, regardless of the age of the minor, if the perpetrator has himself paid or has had the purpose of having himself paid a ransom by the persons under whose authority or supervision the minor was placed.
The same penalty is applied if the purpose of the abduction was the execution of an order or a condition.
However, if the minor is found alive before the pronouncement of the conviction decision, the penalty is imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 532-17

In the cases provided for in Articles 532-14 to 532-16 above, the abduction is punished by life imprisonment if it was followed by the death of the minor.

Article 532-18

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, without violence, threat or fraud abducts or attempts to abduct or divert a minor.

Article 532-19

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, when a decision has been made on the custody of a minor by a court decision enforceable provisionally or definitively, or by a judicially approved agreement, the father, mother, or any other person who does not present this minor to those who have the right to claim them or who, even without fraud or violence, abducts them, diverts them or causes them to be abducted or diverted from the hands of those to whom their custody has been entrusted, or from the places where the latter have placed them. If the perpetrator had been declared deprived of parental authority, the imprisonment may be increased to three years.

Article 532-20

Any person who transfers their domicile to another place after divorce, legal separation or annulment of marriage when the children habitually reside with them, must notify any change of their domicile and any change of the children's residence to those who may exercise a right of visit or accommodation with respect to them by virtue of a judgment or a judicially approved agreement.
If they fail to give this notification within one month, they are punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to six months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs.

Article 532-21

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, except in the case where the act constitutes a punishable act of complicity, anyone who has knowingly

concealed or removed from searches a minor who has been abducted or diverted or who has removed them from the authority to which they are legally subject.

Section 4: Circulation of minors Article 532-22

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to six months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, any person who, managing an establishment prohibited to minors under eighteen years of age, allows them to enter.
In case of recidivism, the definitive or temporary closure of the establishment is pronounced. When the closure is pronounced on a temporary basis, its duration may not exceed five years.

Article 532-23

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to six months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, any person who, managing an establishment, serves alcoholic beverages to a minor under eighteen years of age even when accompanied by their parents or guardians.
In the latter case, the parents, guardians or representatives who accompany minor children are punished by a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs.

Article 532-24

When in a cinema or any other public place is shown a film prohibited in particular to minors under eighteen years of age or under thirteen years of age, a poster of fifty centimetres by twenty bearing exclusively the mention "Film prohibited to minors under eighteen years of age" or "Film prohibited to minors under thirteen years of age" must be posted in a very visible manner at the ticket counters above the price list or the schedule of showings or on the posters; mention must be made in a very legible manner in all advertising concerning the said film including trailers.
Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one month to three months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000)

CFA francs, any person who, managing a cinema, does not ensure the publicity of the prohibition under the prescribed conditions.
In case of recidivism, the temporary closure for a period not exceeding five years, or definitive closure of the cinema is pronounced.

CHAPTER 3: CRIMES AND OFFENCES AGAINST MORALS

Section 1: Offences against morals and sexual assaults

Article 533-1

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to two years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who commits a public outrage to decency.
Constitutes a public outrage to decency any sexual exhibition or any other intentional act contrary to good morals accomplished publicly or in a private place accessible to public view, likely to offend the decency and moral sentiment of persons who are involuntary witnesses thereof.
However, such an act committed in private, in the presence of a minor constitutes an offence of incitement of a minor to debauchery.
The attempt of public outrage to decency is punished by the same penalties.

Article 533-2

Constitutes an indecent assault any act of a sexual nature contrary to public morals committed directly and intentionally on a minor or with violence, constraint or surprise on an adult.

Article 533-3

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to seven years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, any indecent assault, consummated or attempted without violence, constraint or surprise on the person of a minor under thirteen years of age of either sex.
If the perpetrator is an ascendant of the minor or if he is one of those who have authority conferred upon him by his function or if he acted in a group, he is punished by a term

of imprisonment of seven years to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 533-4

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, any indecent assault consummated or attempted without violence, constraint or surprise on the person of a minor from thirteen to fifteen years of age of either sex.
Is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to five years and a fine of two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs any indecent assault consummated or attempted without violence, constraint or surprise on the person of a minor over fifteen years of age and under eighteen years of age of either sex.
If the perpetrator is an ascendant of the minor or if he is one of those who have authority over him or if he abused the authority conferred upon him by his function or if he acted in a group, he is punished by a term of imprisonment of four years to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 533-5

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of three years to ten years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, any indecent assault consummated or attempted with violence, constraint or surprise on the person of a minor under thirteen years of age, of either sex.
If the perpetrator is an ascendant of the minor or if he is one of those who have authority over him or if he abused the authority conferred upon him by his function or if he acted in a group, he is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 533-6

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two years to ten years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs any indecent assault consummated or attempted with violence, constraint or surprise on the person of a minor from thirteen to fifteen years of age, of either sex.

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs any indecent assault consummated or attempted with violence, constraint or surprise on the person of a minor over fifteen years of age and under eighteen years of age of either sex.
If the perpetrator is an ascendant of the minor or if he is one of those who have authority over the child, or if he abused the authority conferred upon him by his function or if he acted in a group, he is punished by imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of three million (3,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 533-7

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to three years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, any indecent assault consummated or attempted with violence, constraint or surprise against persons of either sex.
If the perpetrator has authority over the victim or if he abused the authority conferred upon him by his function or if he acted in a group, he is punished by a term of imprisonment of three years to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 533-8

The attempt of indecent assault is punishable.

Article 533-9

Sexual harassment is the act of imposing on a person, repeatedly, remarks or behavior with sexual connotations which either violates his or her dignity by reason of their degrading or humiliating character, or creates an intimidating, hostile or offensive situation against him or her.
Is assimilated to sexual harassment the act, even if not repeated, of using any form of serious pressure, with the real or apparent purpose of obtaining an act of a sexual nature, for oneself or for the benefit of a third party.
Sexual harassment is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to three years and a fine of two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.

The penalty is imprisonment of three years to five years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs when the acts are committed:	by a person who abuses the authority conferred upon him by his functions;	on a minor under eighteen years of age;	on a person whose particular vulnerability due to his age, an illness, an infirmity, a physical or mental deficiency or a state of pregnancy, is apparent or known to the perpetrator.

Article 533-10

Any act of sexual penetration, of whatever nature, committed on the person of another by violence, constraint, threat or surprise constitutes rape.
Rape is punished by a term of imprisonment of seven years to ten years and a fine of six hundred thousand (600,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 533-11

Rape is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs:	when it has resulted in mutilation or permanent disability;	when it is committed on a minor from thirteen to fifteen years of age at most;	when it is committed on a person whose particular vulnerability, due to his age, an illness, an infirmity, a physical or mental deficiency or a state of pregnancy, is apparent or known to the perpetrator;	when it is committed by an ascendant or by any other person having authority of law or fact over the victim;	when it is committed by a person who abuses the authority conferred upon him by his functions;	when it is committed by several persons acting as perpetrators or accomplices;
when it is committed with use or threat of a weapon;	when the victim was put in contact with the perpetrator of the acts through the use, for the dissemination of messages intended for an undetermined public, of an electronic communication network;	when it is committed in conjunction with one or more other rapes committed on other victims;	when it is committed by a person acting in a state of manifest intoxication or under the manifest influence of narcotic drugs.

Article 533-12

When rape is committed repeatedly on an intimate and habitual partner with whom the perpetrator maintains stable and continuous sexual relations or when said partner is in any physical incapacity to accomplish a sexual relation, the penalty is a fine of two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs.

Article 533-13

Rape committed on a minor person under thirteen years of age of either sex, is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of three million (3,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 533-14

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of nine hundred thousand (900,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, the act by teaching personnel or any educational system, of having a sexual relationship with a pupil, apprentice or trainee who is a minor of either sex.
If this sexual relationship results in the pregnancy of the pupil, apprentice or trainee, the term of imprisonment is seven years to ten years and the fine is three million (3,000,000) to six million (6,000,000) CFA francs.
The court seized may in addition pronounce a prohibition from exercising the profession of teacher or member of the educational system for a period which may not exceed five years.

Article 533-15

Constitutes the offence of adultery, the act by a married person of having sexual relations with a person other than their spouse.
Any person convicted of adultery is punished by a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs.

Article 533-16

Prosecution for adultery may only be initiated upon complaint by the spouse.
Withdrawal of the complaint terminates proceedings brought against the adulterous spouse and their accomplice.
Withdrawal occurring subsequent to a conviction that has become final stops the effects of that conviction both with regard to the adulterous spouse and their accomplice.

Article 533-17

Proof of adultery is established either by bailiff's report, or by official report of flagrante delicto drawn up by a judicial police officer, or by confession related in letters, correspondence or documents emanating from the accused or their accomplice or by judicial confession.

Article 533-18

Constitutes the offence of incest punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, the act of having sexual relations with one's ascendants or descendants without limitation of degree or with a brother or sister who is full, consanguineous or uterine.
Except in cases of notorious concubinage or incestuous marriage, prosecution may only be initiated upon complaint by a relative and only against the person or persons designated in the complaint.

Section 2: Of prostitution and corruption of youth

Article 533-19

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine of one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, whoever habitually incites to debauchery or favours the corruption of minors from thirteen to eighteen years of either sex or even occasionally of minors under eighteen years.

Article 533-20

Prostitution is the act by a person of either sex of habitually engaging in sexual acts with others for remuneration.
Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one month to three months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, the act, by any means, including by an attitude even if passive, of publicly soliciting others with a view to inciting them to sexual relations in exchange for remuneration or a promise of remuneration.

Article 533-21

The attempt of the offences provided for in articles 531-1 to 533-20 above is punishable.

Article 533-22

Procuring is the act, by anyone, in any manner whatsoever: of aiding, assisting or protecting the prostitution of others; of profiting from the prostitution of others, sharing the proceeds thereof or receiving subsidies from a person habitually engaging in prostitution; of recruiting, enticing or diverting a person with a view to prostitution or of exerting pressure on them to prostitute themselves or continue to do so.
Procuring is punished by a term of imprisonment of three years to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to six million (6,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 533-23

Is assimilated to procuring and punished by the same penalties as those provided for in article 533-22 above, the act, by anyone, in any manner whatsoever: of acting as intermediary between two persons one of whom engages in prostitution and the other exploits or remunerates the prostitution of others; of facilitating for a procurer the justification of fictitious resources; of being unable to justify resources corresponding to one's lifestyle while living with a person who habitually engages in prostitution or while being in habitual relations with one or more persons engaging in prostitution; of obstructing the action of prevention, control, assistance or re-education undertaken by qualified organisations with regard to persons in danger of prostitution or engaging in prostitution.

Article 533-24

Procuring is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs when it is committed: with regard to a person whose particular vulnerability, due to their age, an illness, an infirmity, a physical or mental deficiency or a state of pregnancy, is apparent or known to its perpetrator; with regard to several persons; with regard to a person who has been incited to engage in prostitution either outside the territory of Burkina Faso, or upon their arrival on Burkinabe territory; by a legitimate, natural or adoptive ascendant of the person who prostitutes themselves or by a person who has authority over them or abuses the authority conferred upon them by their functions;
by a person called upon to participate, by virtue of their functions, in the fight against prostitution, the protection of health or the maintenance of public order; by a person carrying a weapon; with the use of constraint, violence or fraudulent manoeuvres; by several persons acting in the capacity of perpetrators or accomplices, without their constituting an organised gang; through the use, for the dissemination of messages intended for an undetermined public, of an electronic communication network.

Article 533-25

The acts provided for in article 533-24 above are punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of three million (3,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs when they are committed by an organised gang.
Procuring committed by resorting to torture or acts of barbarity is punished by life imprisonment.

Article 533-26

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of three million (3,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs the act, by anyone, acting directly or through an intermediary: of owning, managing, operating, directing, causing to function, financing or contributing to financing an establishment of prostitution; of owning, managing, operating, directing, causing to function, financing or contributing to financing any establishment open to the public or used by the public, of accepting or habitually tolerating that one or more persons engage in prostitution inside the establishment or its annexes or seek clients there with a view to prostitution;
of selling or making available to one or more persons premises or locations not used by the public, knowing that they will engage in prostitution there; of selling, renting or making available, in any manner whatsoever, to one or more persons, vehicles of any nature knowing that they will engage in prostitution there.

Article 533-27

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine of one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who habitually receives one or more persons engaging in prostitution inside a hotel, boarding house, drinking establishment, club, circle, dance hall or place of entertainment or their annexes or any place open to the public or used by the public and of which he is the holder, manager or agent.
The same penalties are applicable to any person who assists said holders, managers or agents.
In all cases, the decision of conviction must order the withdrawal of the license of which the convicted person was a beneficiary. It may, in addition, order the temporary or permanent closure of the establishment.

Article 533-28

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to one year and a fine of two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, by gestures, words or by any other means, publicly solicits persons of either sex with a view to inciting them to debauchery.

Article 533-29

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to two years and a fine of two hundred fifty thousand (250,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who tolerates the habitual and clandestine practice of debauchery in premises or locations not used by the public which he has at his disposal in whatever capacity.

Article 533-30

For the offenses provided for in this section, the court seized may order the prohibition of the exercise of civil and/or family rights for a period which may not exceed five years.

Section 3

Sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography

Article 533-31

For the purposes of this section, the following are understood as:	sale of children: any act or transaction whereby a child is handed over by any person or group of persons to another person or to another group of persons in return for remuneration or any other advantage;	child prostitution: the use of a child for the purposes of sexual activities in return for remuneration or any other form of advantage;	child pornography: any representation, by whatever means, of a child engaging in explicit sexual activities, real or simulated, or any representation of the body of a child, for primarily sexual purposes;	pornographic material: any medium including methods and materials conveying or serving to convey a visual or sound representation or a description of a person engaged in a real or simulated sexual act, demonstration or performance;	victim of sale of children, child pornography and child prostitution: any child who has been the object of sale of children and/or child pornography and/or child prostitution;	witness to sale of children, child pornography and child prostitution: any person, eyewitness or indirect witness, that is to say having heard cries coming from the places where these offenses were committed.

Paragraphe 1 : De la vente d'enfants Article 533-32

A child means any human being under the age of eighteen years.
The age of the child is determined by the production of birth certificates, declaratory judgments or any other documents corroborated by medical expertise. In case of conflict as to the determination of age, the competent court seized shall assess sovereignly.
If the documents produced specify only the year of birth, it shall be considered as having occurred on the thirty-first of December of said year. If the month is specified, the birth shall be considered as having occurred on the last day of said month.

Article 533-33

Constitutes the offense of sale of children:	the act of offering, handing over or accepting a child, whatever the means used, for the purposes of exploiting him, transferring the child's organs for consideration, subjecting the child to forced labor;	the act of unduly obtaining, as an intermediary, consent to the adoption of a child, in return for remuneration or any other form of advantage.

Article 533-34

The sale of a child is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.

Paragraphe 2 : De la prostitution des enfants

Article 533-35

Constitutes the offense of child prostitution, the act of offering, accepting, procuring or obtaining a child for the purposes of prostitution.

Article 533-36

Child prostitution is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.

Paragraphe 3 : De la pornographie enfantine

Article 533-37

Constitutes the offense of child pornography, the act by any person:	of offering, accepting, procuring or obtaining a child for the purposes of pornography as defined by law;	of producing, making, distributing, disseminating, importing, exporting, offering, ordering, selling, buying, storing, possessing or holding by means of a computer system or by any other medium child pornography;	of exposing pornographic material to a child to train him in sexual activities;	of using the Internet or any other computer technology to manufacture, disseminate, acquire, exchange images or pornographic materials depicting children;	of using the Internet or any other computer technology to lure a child online for the purposes of pornography;	of using the Internet or any other computer technology or material to view pornographic images depicting children;	of directing to pornographic material depicting children or of facilitating the possession or downloading of pornographic materials depicting children;	of refraining from taking measures to prevent the possession, viewing or downloading of pornographic materials depicting children;
of facilitating a child's access to images, documents, sound or a representation of a pornographic nature;	of habitually consulting or in return for payment for an online public communication service, making available images or videos of child pornography;	of making, for any adult person, sexual propositions to a child under fifteen years of age or to a person presenting himself as such by using a means of electronic communication.

Article 533-38

Child pornography is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years and a fine of one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.
In the case referred to in Article 533-37 dash 9, the term of imprisonment is eleven to fifteen years and the fine from two million five hundred thousand (2,500,000) francs to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.

Paragraphe 4 : Des dispositions communes Article 533-39

Any person suspected either as perpetrator or as accomplice to one of the offenses referred to in this section, committed outside Burkina Faso, may be prosecuted and tried in accordance with Burkinabe law when the victim is of Burkinabe nationality.

Article 533-40

Any person who, having taken part in an association or agreement to commit one of the offences provided for in this section, may benefit from mitigating circumstances if, having disclosed the existence of this association or agreement to the judicial authority, they thereby enable the identification of the other persons involved and/or prevent the commission of the offence.

Article 533-41

Any person who, in the exercise of their profession or on any other occasion, has knowledge of cases of sale of children, child prostitution or child pornography, has the obligation to inform the competent judicial or administrative authority, under penalty of prosecution for complicity.

Article 533-42

In the event of a repeat offence of one of the offences provided for in this section, the penalty incurred is eleven years to twenty-one years' imprisonment and a fine of three million (3,000,000) to six million (6,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 533-43

The term of imprisonment is eleven years to twenty-one years and the fine three million (3,000,000) to six million (6,000,000) CFA francs, when the offence of sale of children, child prostitution or pornography depicting children has been committed in one of the following aggravating circumstances:	if the victim is particularly vulnerable due to a disability;	if it has resulted in temporary disability;	if the victim is sequestered, deprived of food or exposed in a public or private place;	if the act was committed by fraud or violence, by use of false capacity, false title or falsified or altered documents or false authorisations;	if the perpetrator uses narcotics or any other substance likely to alter the victim's will;	if the perpetrator has abused the authority conferred upon them by their functions or capacity in relation to the victim;	if the perpetrator is carrying a visible or concealed weapon;	if the perpetrator is an ascendant or a person having authority over the victim.

Article 533-44

The perpetrator of the offences referred to in articles 533-33, 533-35, and 533-37 incurs life imprisonment:	when the victim suffers mutilation or permanent disability;	when the victim's death results.

Article 533-45

The court seised shall order:	the confiscation of the means of committing the offence as well as the proceeds of the offence;	the confiscation of property or income derived from the offence.

Article 533-46

The court seised may in addition:	order a residence ban and/or temporary prohibition from exercising certain civic, civil or family rights;	order the temporary or permanent withdrawal of a licence, approval or any other authorisation or administrative document from any entity whatever its legal form or from any person whose activity facilitated the commission of the offence;	order the provisional or permanent closure of premises used for the commission of the said offences.

Paragraphe 5 : Protection of victims and witnesses

Article 533-47

The State guarantees the protection of victims and witnesses of sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography. No one may be subjected to attacks, disciplinary sanctions or dismissal for having testified to the acts defined in article 533-31.

Article 533-48

Victims are assisted either by a social worker, or by a recognised person working in the field of childhood and approved by the competent children's court, or by the person exercising parental authority. The child witness is assisted either by a social worker, or by a recognised person working in the field of childhood and approved by the competent children's court, or by the person exercising parental authority.

Article 533-49

For the protection of the identity and privacy of victims and witnesses, the trial courts may order proceedings in camera. The trial courts may dispense victims or witnesses from appearing at the hearing or take any useful measures to protect their identity and privacy.

Article 533-50

Victims of the offences covered by this section are assisted before the courts of investigation and trial by a lawyer of their choice or appointed ex officio.

Article 533-51

The public prosecutor may request that victims whose legal representative is not known or does not present sufficient guarantees for safeguarding the rights and well-being of the child be placed under guardianship, after, where appropriate, a social investigation conducted by the competent services.

Article 533-52

Children who are victims or witnesses of offences of sale of children, child prostitution or child pornography are not criminally liable.

BOOK VI: CRIMES AND OFFENCES AGAINST PROPERTY

TITLE I

THEFTS, EXTORTIONS, SERIOUS BANDITRY, FRAUD, BREACH OF TRUST, USURY, RECEIVING STOLEN GOODS, COUNTERFEITING

CHAPTER 1: THEFTS AND EXTORTIONS

Article 611-1

Any person who fraudulently misappropriates a thing belonging to another is guilty of theft.

Article 611-2

Theft is punishable by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 611-3

Any building, dwelling, lodge, caravan, tent or cabin, even mobile, which, even if not currently inhabited, is intended for habitation and everything dependent thereon such as courtyards, farmyards, stables, buildings enclosed therein, whatever their use, is deemed to be an inhabited house.

Article 611-4

Any forcing, breaking, damage, demolition, removal of walls, roofs, floors, doors, windows, locks, padlocks or other utensils or instruments used to close or prevent passage and any kind of enclosure whatsoever is qualified as breaking and entering.
External breaking and entering is that by means of which one can enter houses, courtyards, farmyards, enclosures or outbuildings or private apartments or dwellings.
Internal breaking and entering is that which, after entry into the places mentioned in the preceding paragraph, is done to doors, internal enclosures, as well as to cupboards or other closed furniture.
Included in the class of internal breaking and entering is the simple removal of crates, boxes, bales in canvas and rope, and other closed furniture, which

contain any effects whatsoever, even though the breaking and entering was not done on the spot.

Article 611-5

Scaling is the act of entering any place, either over an element of enclosure, or through any opening not intended to serve as an entrance.

Article 611-6

All picks, imitated, counterfeited or altered keys or keys which were not intended by the owner or tenant for the locks of any kind to which the offender has used them are qualified as false keys.
The genuine key unduly retained by the perpetrator of the offence is also considered a false key.

Article 611-7

The perpetrator of a theft carrying a visible or concealed weapon is punishable by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.
The same penalty applies to the perpetrator who held a weapon in a motorised vehicle used to travel to the scene of the offence or to ensure their escape.

Article 611-8

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to thirty years and a fine of three million (3,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who commits a theft with at least three of the following circumstances: if the theft was committed with violence or threats of violence or illegal wearing of uniform or usurpation of a position of authority; if the theft was committed at night; if the theft was committed jointly by two or more persons; if the theft was committed by means of scaling, external or internal breaking and entering, underground opening or false keys in a house, an apartment, a room or a dwelling inhabited or used for habitation or their outbuildings;
if the perpetrator of the theft secured the use of a motorized vehicle in order to facilitate his enterprise or favor his escape; if the perpetrator is a domestic servant even when he committed the theft against persons he was not serving, but who were either in his employer's house, or in the house where he accompanied him; if the perpetrator is an employee or apprentice in the house, workshop or store of his employer or if he is an individual working in the dwelling where he stole.

Article 611-9

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of twenty years to thirty years and a fine of five million (5,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who commits a theft on public roads or in vehicles used for the transport of passengers, mail or luggage or within the premises of stations, airports, landing or boarding docks when the theft was committed in the circumstances referred to in the preceding article.
If the victim suffered injuries the penalty is life imprisonment.

Article 611-10

Are considered as public roads, the roads, tracks, paths or any other places dedicated to public use located outside built-up areas and where any individual may freely circulate at any hour of the day or night without legal opposition from anyone.

Article 611-11

Theft is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to ten years, and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs when it: is committed by several persons acting as perpetrators or accomplices, without constituting an organized gang; is committed by a person holding public authority or charged with a public service mission, in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of his functions or his mission;
is committed by a person who improperly assumes the capacity of a person holding public authority or charged with a public service mission; is preceded, accompanied or followed by threats of violence or violence against others not having resulted in total incapacity to work; is committed in a place used or intended for the storage of funds, valuables, goods or materials; is committed in a vehicle assigned to public passenger transport or in a place intended for access to a means of public passenger transport; is preceded, accompanied or followed by an act of destruction, degradation or deterioration; is committed by reason of the membership or non-membership, true or supposed, of the victim in a particular ethnic group, nation, race or religion; is committed by a person voluntarily concealing all or part of his face in order not to be identified; is committed in educational or training establishments as well as, during the entries or exits of students or within a very close time thereof, in the vicinity of these establishments; is preceded, accompanied or followed by violence against others having resulted in total incapacity to work for eight days or less; is committed by means of scaling, external or internal breaking and entering, underground opening or false keys in a building even not used for habitation; is committed at night; is committed with illegal wearing of uniform or usurpation of a position of authority;
is committed during a fire or after an explosion, a collapse, a flood, a disaster, a revolt, a riot or any other disturbance; involved an object that ensured the safety of any means of public or private transport.

Article 611-12

Theft is punished by a term of imprisonment of five years to seven years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs when it is committed by an adult with the help of one or more minors aged thirteen to under eighteen years, acting as perpetrators or accomplices.
The penalties are increased to five years to ten years of imprisonment and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs when the adult is assisted by one or more minors under thirteen years of age.

Article 611-13

Theft is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs when it involves: a movable object classified or registered pursuant to the provisions of the law relating to the protection of cultural heritage in Burkina Faso, or a private archive document classified pursuant to the provisions of the same law; an archaeological discovery made during excavations or fortuitously; a cultural property that belongs to the movable public domain or that is exhibited, preserved or deposited, even temporarily, either in a museum of Burkina Faso, a library, a media library or an archive service, or in a place belonging to a public person or a private person performing a mission of general interest, or in a building assigned to worship.
The term of imprisonment is twenty-one years to thirty years and the fine five million (5,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs when

the offense provided for in this article is committed with one of the circumstances provided for in Article 611-7.
The fines mentioned in this article may be increased up to half the value of the stolen property.

Article 611-14

Theft is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs: when it is facilitated by the condition of a person whose particular vulnerability, due to his age, an illness, an infirmity, a physical or mental deficiency, is apparent or known to its perpetrator; when it is facilitated by the condition of a person whose particular vulnerability, due to a state of pregnancy, is apparent or known to its perpetrator.

Article 611-15

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of six months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, anyone who counterfeits or alters keys.
The term of imprisonment is four years to ten years and the fine one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, if the offender is a locksmith by profession.
The court seized orders the confiscation of the false keys and the equipment.
The court may further order on a provisional basis for a period not exceeding five years or permanently, the closure of the establishment in the cases referred to in paragraph 2.

Article 611-16

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of three years to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who steals from fields animals, beasts of burden or draft, large and small livestock or agricultural instruments.

The same penalties are applicable to the theft of wood in cuttings, stones in quarries, as well as to the theft of fish in ponds, fish farms or reservoirs.

Article 611-17

Is punishable by a term of imprisonment from two years to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who steals from fields crops or other useful products of the land whether detached from the soil or not, or from granaries.
If the theft was committed at night, either by several persons, or with the aid of a vehicle or pack animals, the imprisonment is from five years to ten years and the fine from one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 611-18

Is punishable by a term of imprisonment from one year to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who by any means whatsoever fraudulently extracts from a distribution network running water, fuel, electrical energy or any other energy having economic value or fraudulently uses any product emanating from an apparatus for the purpose of transmitting or receiving information.

Article 611-19

Is punishable by a term of imprisonment from six months to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, anyone who uses a motorized vehicle without the knowledge or against the will of the owner.
Prosecution takes place only upon complaint by the injured person; withdrawal of the complaint terminates the prosecution.

Article 611-20

Is punishable by a term of imprisonment from one year to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, the co-heir or claimant to an estate who fraudulently disposes of all or part of the inheritance before partition.

Article 611-21

Is punishable by a term of imprisonment from one year to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, the person under seizure who voluntarily destroys or misappropriates seized objects entrusted to his custody or to that of a third party.

Article 611-22

Is punishable by a term of imprisonment from one year to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, any debtor, borrower or third party pledgor who misappropriates or voluntarily destroys an object given as pledge of which he is the owner.

Article 611-23

Is punishable by imprisonment from two months to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, or one of these two penalties, anyone who, having fortuitously found a movable thing, appropriates it without notifying the competent local authority or the owner.
Is punishable by the same penalty anyone who fraudulently appropriates a movable thing that came into his possession by error or fortuitously.

Article 611-24

Is punishable by a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, anyone who having found a treasure, even on his property, refrains from notifying the public authority within fifteen days of the discovery.
Is punishable by a term of imprisonment from two months to six months and two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, any finder who, having or not having notified the public authority, appropriates the treasure, in whole or in part, without having been sent into possession by the competent magistrate.

Article 611-25

Is punishable by a term of imprisonment from two months to six months and two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, anyone who, knowing that he is in absolute impossibility of paying or who is determined not to pay, has beverages or food served to him which he consumes in whole

or in part in establishments intended for that purpose, even if he is lodged in said establishments.
The same penalty is applicable to one who, knowing that he is in absolute impossibility of paying or who is determined not to pay, has one or more rooms assigned to him in a hotel, inn or camp and effectively occupies them.
However, in the cases provided for in the preceding paragraphs, the occupation of lodging must not exceed fifteen hotel days.

Article 611-26

Is punishable by a term of imprisonment from two months to six months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) francs to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, anyone who, knowing that he is in impossibility of paying or who is determined not to pay, hires a taxi or takes a seat in a public transport vehicle.

Article 611-27

Is punishable by a term of imprisonment from two months to six months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) francs to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, anyone who, knowing that he is in absolute impossibility of paying or who is determined not to pay, has fuels or lubricants served to him by distribution professionals.

Article 611-28

Is punishable by a term of imprisonment from five years to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, by force, violence or constraint, extorts the signature or delivery of a writing, an act, computer data, a title or any document whatsoever containing or effecting obligations, dispositions or releases.

Article 611-29

Is guilty of blackmail and punishable by a term of imprisonment from one year to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, by means of written or verbal threat, of revelation or defamatory imputation, obtains either the delivery of funds or securities, or the delivery of computer data, or the signature or delivery of the writings provided for in article 611-28 above.

Article 611-30

In all cases provided for in this chapter, the court seized may in addition pronounce the prohibition from exercising civil rights and/or the prohibition of residence for a duration which may not exceed five years.

The attempt of the offenses provided for in this chapter is punishable.

CHAPTER 2: AGGRAVATED BANDITRY

Article 612-1

For the purposes of this chapter, acts of aggravated banditry mean thefts characterized by the use of any weapons whatsoever, any forms of violence against persons or any other mechanical or chemical processes.

Article 612-2

Are notably constitutive of acts of aggravated banditry: theft, when it was committed on public roads or in private vehicles or vehicles used for transporting passengers, correspondence or luggage, in the circumstances provided for in article 612-1 above; theft, when it was preceded, accompanied or followed by another crime; theft committed with use of a weapon; theft committed with carrying of a visible or concealed weapon; theft committed with violence or accompanied by any act of barbarity or torture; theft committed by using mechanical or chemical processes.

Article 612-3

Is punishable by a term of imprisonment from eleven years to life imprisonment and a fine of five million (5,000,000) to fifty million (50,000,000) CFA francs, any person found guilty of an act of aggravated banditry as defined in articles 612-1 and 612-2 above.

The provisions of this chapter are not applicable in case of harm to life.

Article 612-4

In case of conviction, the court may pronounce a sentence with partial suspension.
The court that pronounces a firm term of imprisonment must accompany it with a safety period at least equal to half of the sentence pronounced.
The safety period determines a maximum incompressible detention period.

Article 612-5

In matters of aggravated banditry, special protection may be granted to witnesses as well as to their families.

Article 612-6

The offences provided for in this chapter are established and prosecuted in accordance with the provisions of criminal procedure applicable to serious organised crime.

CHAPTER 3: FRAUD AND BREACH OF TRUST

Section 1: Fraud Article 613-1

Any person is guilty of fraud who, either by using a false name or false capacity, or by abusing a true capacity, or by employing fraudulent schemes to deceive a natural or legal person and thereby induce them, to their prejudice or to the prejudice of another, to hand over funds, securities, computer data or any property whatsoever, to provide a service or to consent to an act creating an obligation or discharge.

Article 613-2

Fraud is punished by a term of imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.

The penalty is five years to ten years' imprisonment and a fine of three million (3,000,000) to fifteen million (15,000,000) CFA francs when the fraud is committed: by a person holding public authority or charged with a public service mission, in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of their functions or mission; by a person who unduly assumes the capacity of a person holding public authority or charged with a public service mission; by a person who has made an appeal to the public with a view to the issue of shares, bonds, debentures, units or any securities whatsoever, either of a company or of a commercial or industrial enterprise; by a person who makes an appeal to the public with a view to the issue of securities or with a view to the collection of funds for humanitarian or social mutual aid purposes; by a person using a means of electronic communication; to the prejudice of a person whose particular vulnerability, due to their age, illness, infirmity, physical or mental deficiency or state of pregnancy, is apparent or known to its perpetrator.
The term of imprisonment is seven years to ten years and the fine five million (5,000,000) to thirty million (30,000,000) CFA francs when the fraud is committed by an organised gang.
In all cases, the court seized may order the deprivation of civil rights and/or prohibition from residing in certain areas, for a period which may not exceed five years.
The attempt of the offences provided for in this section is punishable.

Section 2: Breach of trust

Article 613-3

Any person who misappropriates or dissipates to the prejudice of another, funds, securities, computer data or any property whatsoever which have been handed over to them and which they have accepted on condition of returning them, producing them or making a specified use of them, is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 613-4

The term of imprisonment is five years to ten years and the fine three million (3,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs when the breach of trust is committed: by a public ministerial officer, a judicial representative, a sequestrator, a business agent, a commercial agent or any person whose profession is to manage the affairs of others, in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of their functions or profession; by a person who makes an appeal to the public in order to obtain the handing over of funds or securities either on their own account or as a director (director, administrator, manager in particular) or agent de jure or de facto of an industrial or commercial enterprise; by any other person who, habitually, engages in or lends their assistance, even in an ancillary capacity, to transactions relating to the property of third parties on whose behalf they collect funds or securities; by a person using a means of electronic communication; to the prejudice of an association which makes an appeal to the public with a view to the collection of funds for humanitarian or social mutual aid purposes; to the prejudice of a person whose particular vulnerability, due to their age, illness, infirmity, physical or mental deficiency or state of pregnancy, apparent or known to its perpetrator.

Article 613-5

Any person who, after having produced in a judicial dispute any title, document or memorandum, removes it in any manner whatsoever, is punished by a term of imprisonment of one month to three months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs.

Article 613-6

Any person who abuses the needs, weaknesses or passions of a minor or an incapacitated adult, in order to make them subscribe, to their prejudice, obligations, receipts or discharges, for a loan of money or movable things or bills of exchange or any other obligatory instruments, in whatever form this transaction has been made or disguised, is punished by a term of imprisonment of two years to five years and a fine of six hundred thousand (600,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs.
The fine may however be increased to one quarter of the value of the restitutions and damages if this quarter exceeds the maximum provided for in the preceding paragraph.
The court seized may in addition order the deprivation of civil rights, and/or of public functions or employment as well as prohibition from residing in certain areas for a period which may not exceed five years.

Article 613-7

Any person who, abusing a signed blank document which has been entrusted to them, fraudulently writes above it an obligation or discharge or any other act capable of compromising the person or fortune of the signatory, is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs.

In the case where the signed blank document has not been entrusted to them, the perpetrator is prosecuted as a forger.

CHAPTER 4: RECEIVING STOLEN GOODS AND COUNTERFEITING

Section 1: Receiving stolen goods Article 614-1

Receiving stolen goods is the act of concealing, holding or transmitting a thing or computer data, or of acting as an intermediary in order to transmit them, knowing that this thing or this computer data comes from a crime or an offence.
Also constitutes receiving stolen goods the act, knowingly, of benefiting, by any means, from the proceeds of a crime or an offence.
Receiving stolen goods is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.
The fine may be increased beyond three million (3,000,000) CFA francs without exceeding half the value of the objects received, all without prejudice to heavier penalties if applicable in case of complicity in a crime.

Article 614-2

Heirs who divert or conceal the effects of an estate or falsely evaluate the composition of an estate, with the aim of harming the interests of other co-heirs, are punished by the penalties provided for in Article 614-1 above.
The accomplices of the perpetrators of the offences provided for in the preceding paragraph, when they exercise prerogatives of parental authority, guardianship or curatorship are punished by the maximum penalties provided for.
The penalties of paragraph 2 are applied to the liquidator of an estate.

Article 614-3

In the case where a criminal penalty is applicable to the act which procured the things received, the receiver is punished by the penalty attached by law to the crime and to the circumstances of the crime of which they had knowledge at the time of receiving.

Section 2: Counterfeiting

Article 614-4

Constitutes the offence of counterfeiting and is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, any edition of writing, musical composition, drawing, painting or any other production published in Burkina Faso or abroad, printed or engraved in whole or in part, made in bad faith and in disregard of the laws and regulations relating to artistic or literary property.
The exportation or importation of counterfeit works is punished by the same penalty.
Also punished by the same penalty is any reproduction, representation, dissemination, translation, adaptation by any means whatsoever of a work of the mind in violation of copyright as defined and regulated by law.

Article 614-5

The penalty is imprisonment of six months to two years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to four million (4,000,000) CFA francs, if it is established that the perpetrator habitually engages in the acts referred to in the preceding article.

Article 614-6

Counterfeit works as well as receipts or shares of receipts that have given rise to confiscation are handed over to the author or his successors in title to compensate them to that extent for the damage they have suffered; the remainder of their compensation or the full compensation, if there has been no confiscation of material, counterfeit objects or receipts, is settled by ordinary means.
The court seized may order at the request of the civil party the publication of the conviction.

Article 614-7

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to three years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, anyone

who discloses without the authorization of the person to whom it belongs, an industrial or commercial fact or process of which he became aware by reason of his employment.

CHAPTER 5: USURY

Article 615-1

Constitutes a usurious loan, any loan or any agreement concealing a loan of money granted, in any matter, at an effective overall interest rate exceeding, on the date of its stipulation, the usury rate.
The usury rate is determined by the Council of Ministers of the West African Monetary Union. It is published in the Official Journal or in a legal notices newspaper, at the initiative of the minister responsible for finance.

Article 615-2

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to two years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs or one of these penalties, anyone who grants to another a usurious loan or knowingly provides, in any capacity and in any manner whatsoever, directly or indirectly, his assistance in obtaining or granting a usurious loan.
In case of recidivism, the maximum penalty shall be increased to five years' imprisonment and fifteen million (15,000,000) CFA francs fine.

Article 615-3

In addition to the penalties set by Article 615-2 above, the court may order: the publication of its decision at the expense of the convicted person in the newspapers it designates, as well as in any form it deems appropriate; the provisional or permanent closure of the enterprise not approved as a credit institution or Decentralized Financial System (DFS) that has engaged or whose managers have engaged in usurious operations, accompanied by the appointment of an administrator or liquidator; in the case of credit institutions and DFSs, the provisional or permanent closure for the reasons invoked in the second bullet point of this article may only be pronounced after the conforming opinion of the Banking Commission

of UMOA or the Central Bank, under the conditions and according to the procedure provided for by the provisions of the law on banking regulation and that on the regulation of DFSs, in matters of collective procedures for clearing liabilities.
In case of provisional closure, the offender or the enterprise must continue to pay its staff the salaries and allowances of any kind to which they are entitled. This period may not exceed three months.
In case of recidivism, permanent closure is ordered.

Article 615-4

Are liable to the penalties provided for in Article 615-2 above and possibly to the measures set out in Article 615-3 above, those who, responsible in any capacity for the management or administration of an enterprise, company, association, cooperative, or other legal person, knowingly allow any person subject to their authority or control to contravene the provisions of this chapter.

CHAPTER 6: FAMILY IMMUNITIES

Article 616-1

Are not punishable and may only give rise to civil reparations theft, fraud, breach of trust and receiving committed between spouses or by ascendants to the detriment of their children or other descendants.

Article 616-2

Theft, fraud, breach of trust or receiving committed by descendants or between collaterals up to and including the fourth degree or in-laws, may only be prosecuted upon complaint by the injured person.
Withdrawal of the complaint ends the prosecution.

Article 616-3

Persons other than those designated in Articles 616-1 and 616-2 above who have acted as co-perpetrators or accomplices to these offences or who have received the proceeds thereof, may not benefit from the provisions of said articles.

TITLE II

OFFENCES AGAINST IMMOVABLE PROPERTY, DESTRUCTION, DAMAGE AND HARM

CHAPTER 1: OFFENCES AGAINST IMMOVABLE PROPERTY

Article 621-1

Constitutes stellionate the act of appropriating, alienating, selling, exchanging, mortgaging or pledging an immovable property which one knew one did not own or of deliberately presenting it as not encumbered by mortgage or alienable.

Article 621-2

Stellionate is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of three hundred thousand (300,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.
Is deemed a stellionataire: anyone who registers in his name an immovable property which he knows he does not own; anyone who registers a real right on a title which he knows does not belong to him and anyone who knowingly accepts the certificate of registration thus established; anyone who registers an immovable property by knowingly omitting to register the mortgages, real rights or charges with which that immovable property is encumbered; anyone who, knowingly, transfers a title of ownership which he knows does not belong to him and anyone who knowingly accepts this transfer; anyone who, obliged to register a legal mortgage on property subject to registration or a forced mortgage on registered property, grants a conventional mortgage on the property that should have been affected.

Article 621-3

Also constitutes the offence of stellionate and punished by the penalties provided for in Article 621-2 above one of the following acts: the fraudulent gift or fraudulent alienation of an immovable property; the fraudulent organization of the loss or destruction of an urban dwelling permit, a title of ownership or any other provisional or final land title or document; the sale to another, a second or several times, of an immovable property previously sold to a person; the act of selling, exchanging, giving in payment or as security, fraudulently, an inalienable immovable property or one that is the subject of a dispute not yet resolved; the act of selling, exchanging, giving in payment or as security, fraudulently, an immovable property that is the subject of a promise of sale.

Article 621-4

The penalty of imprisonment is from two years to seven years and the fine from six hundred thousand (600,000) to six million (6,000,000) CFA francs, if the perpetrator or accomplice is a registrar, an agent of land services, a magistrate, a lawyer, or a ministerial officer.
The penalty of imprisonment is from two years to ten years and the fine from one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, if the perpetrator or accomplice is a member of government, a deputy, a municipal councillor, a mayor, a prefect, a high commissioner, or a governor.
The attempt of stellionate is punishable.

CHAPTER 2: DESTRUCTION, DAMAGE AND INJURY

Section 1

Destruction, damage and injury other than by incendiary means

Article 622-1

Is punished by a penalty of imprisonment from three months to two years and a fine from two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, whoever wilfully destroys or seriously damages a movable object or immovable property belonging to another.
The penalty of imprisonment is from one year to ten years and the fine from one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, when the destruction or damage is committed with breaking and entering.
The same applies:	when the offence is committed against a magistrate or counsel, with a view to influencing their behaviour in the exercise of or on the occasion of the exercise of their functions;	when the offence is committed against a witness, a victim or any other person, either with a view to inducing them not to report the facts, not to file a complaint, not to give evidence or to give false evidence, or by reason of the report, the complaint or the evidence.

Section 2

Destruction, damage and injury by use of an explosive substance or incendiary means

Article 622-2

Is punished by a penalty of imprisonment from five years to ten years and a fine from one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, whoever wilfully destroys or damages a movable object or immovable property belonging to another by means of an explosive or incendiary substance, or a fire or any other means likely to create a danger to the safety of persons.

The penalty of imprisonment is from eleven years to twenty-one years and the fine from one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, if the offence is committed by an organised gang or under the conditions of paragraph 3 of Article 622-1 above.
The penalty is life imprisonment, when the destruction or damage has resulted in the death of a person or an infirmity.

Article 622-3

Is punished by life imprisonment, whoever wilfully destroys or damages a dwelling house, a railway carriage or a vehicle sheltering or containing persons, when the offence is committed by means of an explosive or incendiary substance, a fire or any other means likely to create a danger to the safety of persons and it has resulted in the death of a person.

Article 622-4

Is punished by a penalty of imprisonment from one year to ten years and a fine from one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, whoever wilfully sets fire to the bush, the forest, woods, coppices or standing or cut crops.

Article 622-5

The threat to set fire to a dwelling or any other property is punished by a penalty of imprisonment from two years to ten years and a fine from one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 622-6

Whoever wilfully burns or destroys in any manner registers, minutes or original acts of public authority, titles, notes, bills of exchange, commercial or banking instruments containing or effecting obligations, dispositions or discharge or knowingly destroys, removes, conceals, hides or alters a public or private document likely to facilitate the investigation of crimes or offences, the discovery of evidence or the punishment of their perpetrator, is punished as follows, unless the facts constitute a more serious offence:
a penalty of imprisonment from five years to ten years and a fine from one million (1,000,000) francs to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, if the destroyed documents are acts of public authority or commercial or banking instruments;
a penalty of imprisonment from two years to five years and a fine from six hundred thousand (600,000) francs to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs, if it concerns any other document.

Section 3: Pillage and devastation

Article 622-7

Is punished by a penalty of imprisonment from five years to ten years and a fine from one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, any pillage, any damage to foodstuffs or goods, effects, movable property committed in a gathering or gang and by open force.

Article 622-8

Is punished by a penalty of imprisonment from two years to ten years and a fine from one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, whoever devastates standing crops or plants grown naturally or by human hand.

Article 622-9

Is punished by a penalty of imprisonment from eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine from one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, whoever commits the offences of pillage provided for in Article 622-7 above when they are committed in time of war.
Is punished by the same penalty any theft committed in premises or in any building abandoned by its occupants, even momentarily or partially destroyed, as a result of events of war.

Section 4: Offences against trees, crops and animals Article 622-10

Is punished by a penalty of imprisonment from two months to six months and a fine from two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, whoever fells without prior authorisation one or more trees in the public domain.
The same penalties are applicable to whoever mutilates, cuts or strips the bark of a tree so as to cause it to perish or destroys its grafts.

Article 622-11

The penalty of imprisonment is from six months to one year and the fine from two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, if the trees were planted in squares, roads, paths, streets or public ways.

Article 622-12

Is punished by a penalty of imprisonment from two months to six months and a fine from two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, whoever cuts grain or fodder that they knew belonged to another.
The imprisonment is from six months to one year and the fine from two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs if green grain was cut.

Article 622-13

Is punished by a penalty of imprisonment from one year to ten years and a fine from one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, whoever poisons domestic animals, tamed animals or animals held in captivity or fish in ponds, lakes, rivers, fish ponds or reservoirs.

Article 622-14

Whoever kills without necessity one of the animals mentioned in Article 622-13 above is punished: by a term of imprisonment of two months to six months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, if the offence was committed in the buildings, enclosures and outbuildings or

on the lands of which the owner of the killed animal was the owner, lessee or tenant farmer; by a term of imprisonment of two months to four months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, if it was committed in places of which the offender was the owner, lessee or tenant farmer; by a term of imprisonment of two months to three months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, if it was committed in any other place.

The maximum penalty is always imposed in case of violation of enclosure.

LIVRE VII

OFFENCES IN COMPUTER MATTERS AND BY MEANS OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES

Article 700-1

For the purposes of this book, the following are understood as: computer system: any isolated device or set of interconnected or related devices, which ensures or of which one or more elements ensure, in execution of a program, automated processing of data; electronic communication: any transmission to the public or to a category of the public, by an electronic or magnetic communication process, of signs, signals, writings, images, sounds or messages of any nature; computer data: any representation of facts, information or concepts in a form suitable for computer processing, including a program capable of causing a computer system to perform a function; subscriber data: any information, contained in the form of computer data or in any other form, held by a service provider and relating to subscribers to its services,

other than traffic or content data, and making it possible to establish:
•	the type of communication service used, the technical arrangements made in this regard and the period of service;
•	the identity, postal or geographical address and telephone number of the subscriber, and any other access number, billing and payment data, available on the basis of a contract or service arrangement;
•	any other information relating to the location of communication equipment, available on the basis of a contract or service arrangement. traffic data: all data relating to a communication passing through a computer system, produced by the latter as part of the communication chain, indicating the origin, destination, route, time, date, size and duration of the communication or the type of underlying service. service provider: any public or private entity that offers users of its services the possibility of communicating by means of a computer system; any other entity processing or storing computer data for this communication service or its users; information and communication technologies (ICT): technologies used to collect, store, use and transmit information as well as those involving the use of computers or any communication system including telecommunications.

TITRE I: OFFENCES IN COMPUTER MATTERS

CHAPITRE 1: OFFENCES RELATING TO COMPUTER SYSTEMS AND DATA

Article 711-1

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to two years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, whoever intentionally and without right accesses all or part of a computer system.
When this results in either the deletion, modification or alteration of data contained in the system or an alteration of the functioning of this system, the imprisonment is from one year to five years and the fine from one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 711-2

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two months to two years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) francs, whoever intentionally and without right remains in all or part of a computer system.
When this results in either the deletion, modification or alteration of data contained in the system or an alteration of the functioning of this system, the imprisonment is from two months to three years and the fine from six hundred thousand (600,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 711-3

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to five years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs, whoever intentionally and without right, hinders or distorts the functioning of a computer system, by the introduction, transmission, damaging, erasure, deterioration, alteration and deletion of computer data.

Article 711-4

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to five years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million five hundred thousand (1,500,000) CFA francs, whoever intentionally and without right, introduces directly or indirectly computer data into a computer system.

Article 711-5

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs, whoever intentionally and without right, intercepts, by technical means, computer data, during non-public transmissions, to, from or within a computer system, including electromagnetic emissions from a computer system carrying such computer data.

Article 711-6

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, whoever intentionally and without right, damages, erases, deteriorates, alters, modifies, or deletes computer data.

Article 711-7

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, whoever intentionally and without right, introduces, alters, modifies, erases or deletes computer data, generating non-authentic data, with the intention that they be taken into account or used for legal purposes as if they were authentic, whether or not they are directly readable and intelligible.

Article 711-8

Is punished by the same penalties whoever, intentionally and without right, makes use of data obtained under the conditions provided for in Article 711-7 above.

Article 711-9

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two years to ten years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, whoever, intentionally and without right, causes patrimonial harm to another by the introduction, alteration, modification, erasure or deletion of computer data or by any form of interference with the functioning of a computer system, with the fraudulent or criminal intention of obtaining without right an economic benefit for oneself or for another.

Article 711-10

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two years to ten years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, intentionally and without right, produces, sells, obtains for use, imports, distributes or makes available in any form:	a device, including a computer program, primarily designed or adapted to enable the commission of one of the offences provided for by Articles 711-1 to 711-6 above.	a password, an access code or similar computer data enabling access to all or part of a computer system with the intention that they be used to commit one or other of the offences provided for by Articles 711-1 to 711-6 above.
Is punished by a term of imprisonment of two years to ten years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, intentionally and without right, possesses a device, password, access code or similar data referred to in the first paragraph of this article with the intention that it be used to commit one or other of the offences referred to in Articles 711-1 to 711-6 above.
The offences provided for by this article are not established when the production, sale, obtaining for use, importation, distribution or other forms of making available is not for the purpose of committing an offence, such as in the case of authorised testing or protection of a computer system.

Article 711-11

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of ten million (10,000,000) to fifty million (50,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, intentionally and without right, participates in an association formed or an agreement established with a view to preparing or committing one or more offences provided for by this title.

Article 711-12

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, intentionally and without right, assumes the digital identity of a third party or makes use of one or more data of any nature enabling their identification, with a view to disturbing their peace, harming their honour, their private life, their property or that of a third party.

Article 711-13

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to four million (4,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who, intentionally and without right, intentionally reproduces, extracts or copies computer data belonging to another person.

CHAPITRE 2

BREACHES OF LEGAL OBLIGATIONS IN THE IMPLEMENTATION AND USE OF AN AUTOMATED PERSONAL DATA PROCESSING SYSTEM

Article 712-1

Personal data means any information which enables, in any form whatsoever, directly or not, the identification of natural persons, in particular by reference to an identification number or to one or more elements specific to their physical, physiological, genetic, mental, cultural, social or economic identity.

Article 712-2

Personal data processing means any operation or set of operations carried out using automated or non-automated processes by a natural or legal person, and applied to personal data, such as collection, exploitation, recording, organisation, storage, adaptation, modification, extraction, backup, copying, consultation, use, communication by transmission, dissemination or any other form of making available, comparison or interconnection, as well as locking, encryption, erasure or destruction of personal data.

Article 712-3

The processing controller is the natural or legal person, public or private, who has the power to decide on the creation of personal data.
The recipient of personal data processing is any natural or legal person, public or private, other than the data subject, authorised to receive communication of such data.
The data subject is the identifiable person to whom the personal data relates.

Article 712-4

The act of carrying out or having carried out automated processing of nominative information without the formalities prior to their implementation provided for by law having been complied with is punished by a term of imprisonment of three months to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 712-5

When such information is required by law, is punished by a term of imprisonment of one month to two years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs the act, by the controller of automated processing of personal data:	of not informing the person from whom personal data concerning them is collected:

•	of the identity of the processing controller and, where applicable, that of their representative;
•	of the purpose pursued by the processing for which the data is intended;
•	of the mandatory or optional nature of the responses;
•	of the possible consequences, with regard to them, of a failure to respond;
•	of the recipients or categories of recipients of the data;
•	of their rights of opposition, inquiry, access and rectification;
•	where applicable, of the transfers of personal data envisaged to a foreign State;	when the data is collected by means of a questionnaire, of not including on the questionnaire the information relating to:
•	the identity of the processing controller and, where applicable, that of their representative;
•	the purpose pursued by the processing for which the data is intended;
•	the mandatory or optional nature of the responses;
•	the rights of opposition, inquiry, access and rectification of the persons from whom the data is collected;	of not informing in a clear and precise manner any user of electronic communication networks:
•	of the purpose of any action tending to access, by electronic transmission, information stored in their terminal connection equipment or to record, by the same means, information in their terminal connection equipment;
•	of the means at their disposal to oppose it;
of not providing to the data subject, when the personal data has not been collected from them, the information listed in bullets 1 and 2 from the time of recording the data or, if communication of the data to third parties is envisaged, at the latest at the time of the first communication of the data.

Article 712-6

Is punished by a term of imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs, the act of communicating to unauthorised third parties or accessing without authorisation or in an unlawful manner the personal data of another person.

Article 712-7

Is punished by the penalties provided for the offence itself or for the most severely punished offence, anyone who participates in an association formed or an agreement established with a view to the preparation, materialised by one or more material acts, of one or more offences provided for by the above articles of this chapter.

Article 712-8

The act of carrying out or having carried out automated processing of personal information without taking all useful precautions to preserve the security of said information, in particular to prevent it from being distorted, damaged or communicated to unauthorized third parties, is punishable by a term of imprisonment of three months to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 712-9

The misappropriation of purpose of a collection or processing of personal data is punishable by a term of imprisonment of three months to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 712-10

The act of collecting data by fraudulent, unfair or unlawful means, or of carrying out processing of personal information concerning a natural person despite his or her opposition, where such opposition is based on legitimate reasons, is punishable by a term of imprisonment of three months to five years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.
In the case of automated processing of personal data for the purpose of research in the field of health, the act of carrying out data processing is punishable by the same penalties: without having previously informed the persons concerned individually of their right of access, rectification and opposition, of the nature of the information transmitted and of the recipients of the data; despite the opposition of the person concerned or, where provided for by law, in the absence of the informed and express consent of the person, or, in the case of a deceased person, despite the refusal expressed by that person during his or her lifetime.

Article 712-11

Except in cases provided for by law, the act of storing or keeping in computerized memory, without the express consent of the person concerned, personal data which, directly or indirectly, reveal racial or ethnic origins or political, philosophical or religious opinions or trade union affiliations or the morals of persons, is punishable by a term of imprisonment of three months to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.
The act, except in cases provided for by law, of storing or keeping in computerized memory personal information concerning offences, convictions or security measures is punishable by the same penalties.

Article 712-12

The act, without the agreement of the Commission on Information Technology and Freedoms, of keeping information in personal form beyond the period provided for in the request for an opinion or in the prior declaration to the implementation of

computerized processing is punishable by a term of imprisonment of three months to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 712-13

The act, by any person who has collected, on the occasion of their recording, classification, transmission or another form of processing, personal information the disclosure of which would have the effect of damaging the honor and reputation of the person concerned or the intimacy of his or her private life, of bringing, without authorization from the person concerned, such information to the knowledge of a third party who is not qualified to receive it, is punishable by a term of imprisonment of three months to five years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.
The disclosure provided for in paragraph 1 is punishable by a term of imprisonment of three months to five years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs where it was committed through carelessness or negligence.
In the cases provided for in the two preceding paragraphs, prosecution may only be brought upon complaint by the victim, his or her legal representative or his or her successors in title.

Article 712-14

The act of obstructing the action of the Commission is punishable by a term of imprisonment of one month to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs, either: by opposing on-site verifications; by refusing to communicate to its members or agents the information and documents useful to the mission entrusted to them or by concealing or causing said documents to disappear; by communicating information that does not conform to the content of the records at the time the request was made or that does not present them in a directly intelligible form.

Article 712-15

The provisions of articles 712-6 and 712-8 to 712-13 are applicable to non-automated or mechanographic files whose use does not fall exclusively within the exercise of the right to private life.

TITRE II

OFFENCES COMMITTED BY MEANS OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES

CHAPITRE 1

OFFENCES BY MEANS OF INFORMATION AND COMMUNICATION TECHNOLOGIES

Article 721-1

Any person who, participating in the execution of an electronic communications service, violates the secrecy of correspondence or who, without the authorization of the operator or the recipient, discloses to an unauthorized third party, publishes or uses the content of said correspondence, is punishable by a term of imprisonment of one to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 721-2

Any person who knowingly uses services obtained by means of the offence referred to in article 721-1 above is punishable by a term of imprisonment of one to ten years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million five hundred thousand (2,500,000) CFA francs.

Article 721-3

Any person who fraudulently uses, for personal purposes or otherwise, a network or an electronic communications service open to the public or connects by any means to a private line is punishable by a term of imprisonment of one to ten years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to two million five hundred thousand (2,500,000) CFA francs.

Article 721-4

Is punishable by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of ten million (10,000,000) to fifty million (50,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who: establishes or causes to be established a network open to the public or an independent network, provides or causes to be provided an electronic communications service in violation of the law or maintains it in violation of a suspension or withdrawal decision; performs or causes to be performed a service subject to individual license or general authorization, without authorization or without license or in violation of a decision to suspend or withdraw the license or authorization provided for this purpose by law; performs or causes to be performed a service subject to approval, without approval or in violation of a decision to suspend or withdraw the approval provided for this purpose; uses a frequency that has not been previously assigned to them by the regulatory authority; fraudulently uses "call-back" or means of bypassing electronic communications networks open to the public for commercial or personal purposes.
Bypassing within the meaning of the preceding paragraph covers any arrangement or installation allowing a user to have access to long-distance, international or other services, without using the networks of local operators and thus avoiding payment of access charges and, more generally, any means allowing a user not to use the service or facilities of operators holding an authorization.
Call-back means the procedure for establishing telephone communications between correspondents, by which the person requesting the communication is called back by their correspondent.
The court seized may, at the request of the regulatory authority, order the confiscation of installations, apparatus or means of transmission used without authorization or their destruction at the expense of the offender.

Article 721-5

Is punishable by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, any person who knowingly transmits or broadcasts false or misleading radioelectric signals or distress and safety calls.

Article 721-6

Is punishable by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, any person who carries out radioelectric transmissions knowingly using a call sign from the international series assigned to a State station or a private station.

Article 721-7

Is punishable by a term of imprisonment of one year to ten years and a fine of five million (5,000,000) to twenty million (20,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who voluntarily causes, by any means, the interruption of electronic communications.
When the interruption of electronic communications occurs following an act committed voluntarily but without intent to interrupt electronic communications, the perpetrator of the act is punishable by a term of imprisonment of three months to one year and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 721-8

Is punishable by a term of imprisonment of eleven years to twenty-one years and a fine of fifty million (50,000,000) to one hundred million (100,000,000) CFA francs, anyone who knowingly commits an act of theft or vandalism on electronic communications infrastructure.

Article 721-9

Are punishable by a term of imprisonment of three months to one year and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, offenses relating to private or administrative easements.

Article 721-10

The attempt of the offenses provided for by this title is punishable.

CHAPITRE 2 : DES PEINES COMPLEMENTAIRES

Article 722-1

In case of conviction for an offense committed through an electronic communication means, the competent court may order the confiscation of materials, equipment, instruments, computer programs or data resulting from the offense.
The court may also order as additional penalties the prohibition from sending electronic communication messages, the prohibition on a provisional or permanent basis from accessing the site used to commit the offense or the prohibition from hosting the site by all available technical means.
The judge may issue an injunction to any person legally responsible for the site used to commit the offense, to any qualified person to implement the necessary technical means to guarantee the prohibition of access to or hosting of the incriminated site.
The violation of the prohibitions ordered is punishable by a term of imprisonment of one to three years and a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.
In case of conviction for an offense committed through an electronic communication means, the judge orders as an additional measure the dissemination at the expense of the convicted person, by extract, of the decision on that same electronic communication means.
The publication provided for in the preceding paragraph is executed within fifteen days following the day on which the conviction became final.

The convicted person who has not disseminated or caused to be disseminated the extract of the conviction decision within the time limit set in the preceding paragraph, is punishable by a fine of five hundred thousand (500,000) to three million (3,000,000) CFA francs.

LIVRE VIII

DES INFRACTIONS PREVUES PAR LES ACTES UNIFORMES DE L'ORGANISATION POUR L'HARMONISATION EN AFRIQUE DU DROIT DES AFFAIRES (OHADA)

TITRE I : DES DISPOSITIONS GENERALES ET PEINES APPLICABLES

CHAPITRE 1 : DES DISPOSITIONS GENERALES

Article 811-1

This title sets the penalties applicable to offenses provided for within the framework of the Organization for the Harmonization of Business Law in Africa (OHADA) by the Uniform Acts: relating to general commercial law; relating to the organization of security interests; relating to the law of commercial companies and economic interest groups; relating to the organization of collective proceedings for the settlement of liabilities; relating to the organization of simplified recovery procedures and enforcement methods; relating to the organization and harmonization of company accounting; relating to the law of cooperative societies.

CHAPITRE 2 : DES PEINES APPLICABLES

Section 1

Des peines applicables aux infractions prévues par l'acte uniforme relatif au droit commercial général

Article 812-1

In application of Article 69 of the Uniform Act relating to general commercial law, is punishable by a term of imprisonment of one to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to six hundred thousand (600,000) CFA francs, any person required to complete one of the formalities prescribed

in the Uniform Act and who refrains from doing so, or who carries out a formality by fraud.
If necessary, the court pronouncing the conviction orders the registration or rectification of inaccurate entries.

Article 812-2

In application of Article 140 of the Uniform Act relating to general commercial law, is punishable by the penalties provided for in Article 812-1 above the lessee-manager who does not indicate at the head of their order forms, invoices and other documents of a financial or commercial nature, along with their registration number in the trade and movable credit register, their capacity as lessee-manager of the business.

Section 2

Des peines applicables aux infractions prévues par l'acte uniforme portant organisation des sûretés

Article 812-3

In application of Article 65 of the Uniform Act on Security Interests, any person who registers a security interest either by fraud or by providing inaccurate information or information given in bad faith is punishable by imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.
If necessary, the court pronouncing the conviction orders the registration or rectification of inaccurate entries.

Article 812-4

In application of Article 184 of the Uniform Act on Security Interests, the lessee or any person who, by fraudulent maneuvers, totally or partially deprives the lessor of his privilege is punishable by imprisonment of three months to one year and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.

Section 3

Penalties applicable to offenses provided for by the uniform act relating to the law of commercial companies and economic interest groups

Paragraphe 1

Penalties applicable to offenses relating to the formation of companies

Article 812-5

In application of Article 886 of the Uniform Act relating to the law of commercial companies and economic interest groups, the founders, the chairman and chief executive officer, the chief executive officer, the general manager or the deputy general manager of a public limited company who issue shares before registration or at any time when registration is obtained by fraud or when the company is irregularly formed are punishable by imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 812-6

In application of Article 887 of the Uniform Act relating to the law of commercial companies and economic interest groups, those who are punishable by imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs:	knowingly, by establishing the notarized declaration of subscription and payment or the certificate of the depositary, have affirmed as sincere and true subscriptions that they knew to be fictitious or have declared that funds which have not been definitively placed at the disposal of the company have been actually paid;	have delivered to the notary or to the depositary, a list of shareholders or subscription and payment forms mentioning fictitious subscriptions or payments of funds which have not been definitively placed at the disposal of the company;	knowingly, by simulation of subscription or payment or by publication of payments which do not exist or of any other false facts, have obtained or attempted to obtain subscriptions or payments;
knowingly, to induce subscriptions or payments, have published the names of persons designated contrary to the truth as being or to be attached to the company in any capacity whatsoever;	fraudulently, have caused a contribution in kind to be assigned a valuation higher than its actual value.

Article 812-7

In application of Article 888 of the Uniform Act relating to the law of commercial companies and economic interest groups, those who knowingly negotiate are punishable by imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs:	registered shares which have not remained in registered form until their full payment;	shares issued for contributions in kind before the expiration of the period during which they are not negotiable;	cash shares for which payment of one quarter of the nominal value has not been made.

Paragraphe 2

Penalties applicable to offenses relating to the management, administration and direction of companies

Article 812-8

In application of Article 889 of the Uniform Act relating to the law of commercial companies and economic interest groups, company directors who, in the absence of an inventory or by means of fraudulent inventories, knowingly distribute fictitious dividends among shareholders or members are punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 812-9

In application of Article 890 of the Uniform Act relating to the law of commercial companies and economic interest groups, company directors who knowingly, even in the absence of any distribution of dividends, publish or present to shareholders or members, in order to conceal the true situation of the company, summary financial statements which do not give, for each financial year, a true and fair view of the operations of the financial year, the financial situation and that of the company's assets at the end of that period are punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 812-10

In application of Article 891 of the Uniform Act relating to the law of commercial companies and economic interest groups, the manager of a limited liability company, the directors, the chairman and chief executive officer, the general manager or the deputy general manager who, in bad faith, make use of the company's assets or credit in a manner which they know to be contrary to the interests of the company, for personal purposes, material or moral, or to favor another legal entity in which they have an interest, directly or indirectly, are punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.

Paragraphe 3

Penalties applicable to offenses relating to general meetings

Article 812-11

In application of Article 892 of the Uniform Act relating to the law of commercial companies and economic interest groups, those who knowingly prevent a shareholder or member from participating in a general meeting are punishable by imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to two million (2,000,000) CFA francs.

Paragraphe 4

Penalties applicable to offenses relating to changes in the capital of public limited companies

Article 812-12

In application of Article 893 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, the directors, the chairman of the board of directors, the chairman and chief executive officer, the chief executive officer, the general manager or the deputy general manager of a public limited company who, during a capital increase, issue shares or share certificates are punishable by imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs: before the depositary's certificate is established; without the formalities prior to the capital increase being duly completed; without the previously subscribed capital of the company being fully paid up; without the new shares contributed in kind being fully paid up before the amendment registration in the trade and movable credit register; without the new shares being paid up by at least one quarter of their nominal value at the time of subscription; where applicable, without the entire share premium being paid up at the time of subscription.
The persons referred to in this article who do not maintain cash shares in registered form until they are fully paid up are punishable by the same penalties.

Article 812-13

In application of Article 894 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, company directors who, during a capital increase, are punishable by imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs: do not grant shareholders, in proportion to the amount of their shares, a preferential right to subscribe for cash shares when this right has not been removed by the general meeting and the shareholders have not waived it; do not reserve for shareholders a period of at least twenty days from the opening of the subscription, except when this period is closed early; do not allocate shares made available, for lack of a sufficient number of subscriptions on a non-reducible basis, to shareholders who have subscribed on a reducible basis for a number of shares greater than that which they could subscribe for on a non-reducible basis, in proportion to the rights they hold; do not reserve the rights of holders of subscription warrants.

Article 812-14

In application of Article 895 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, company directors who knowingly give or confirm inaccurate information in the reports presented to the general meeting called to decide on the removal of the preferential subscription right are punishable by imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 812-15

In application of Article 896 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, the directors, the chairman and chief executive officer, the chief executive officer, the deputy general manager who knowingly proceed with a capital reduction are punishable by imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs: without respecting the equality of shareholders; without communicating the capital reduction project to the statutory auditors forty-five days before the holding of the general meeting called to rule on the capital reduction.

Paragraphe 5

Penalties applicable to offences relating to the control of companies

Article 812-16

In application of Article 897 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, company directors who do not initiate the appointment of the company's statutory auditors or do not summon them to general meetings are punishable by imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 812-17

In application of Article 898 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, any person who, either in their own name or as a partner of a statutory auditors' firm, knowingly accepts, exercises or retains the functions of statutory auditor, notwithstanding legal incompatibilities, is punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 812-18

In application of Article 899 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, any statutory auditor who knowingly, either in their own name or as a partner of a statutory auditors' firm, gives or confirms false information

about the situation of the company or who does not disclose to the public prosecutor criminal acts of which they have knowledge is punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 812-19

In application of Article 900 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, company directors or any person in the service of the company who knowingly obstruct the verifications or control of the statutory auditors or who refuse the communication, on site, of all documents useful for the exercise of their mission and in particular of all contracts, books, accounting documents and minutes registers are punishable by imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.

Paragraphe 6

Penalties applicable to offences relating to the dissolution of companies

Article 812-20

In application of Article 901 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, company directors who knowingly, when the company's equity becomes less than half of the share capital due to losses recorded in the summary financial statements, are punishable by imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs: do not convene, within four months following the approval of the financial statements that revealed these losses, the extraordinary general meeting for the purpose of deciding, if necessary, on the early dissolution of the company; do not file with the registry of the court responsible for commercial matters, do not have registered in the trade and movable credit register and do not publish, in a newspaper authorized to receive legal notices, the early dissolution of the company.

Paragraphe 7

Penalties applicable to offences relating to the liquidation of companies

Article 812-21

In application of Article 902 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, the liquidator of a company who knowingly commits the following acts shall be punished by imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs: within one month from his appointment, does not publish in a journal authorized to receive legal notices of the place of the registered office, the act appointing him liquidator and does not file with the trade and movable credit register the decisions pronouncing the dissolution; does not convene the members, at the end of the liquidation, to rule on the final account of the liquidation, on the discharge of his management and the release of his mandate and to note the closure of the liquidation; in the case provided for by Article 219 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, does not file his final accounts with the registry of the court responsible for commercial matters of the place of the registered office, nor does he request judicial approval thereof.

Article 812-22

In application of Article 903 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, where the liquidation occurs by judicial decision, the liquidator who knowingly commits the following acts shall be punished by imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs: within six months of his appointment, does not present a report on the assets and liabilities of the company in liquidation, and on the continuation of liquidation operations, nor does he request the necessary authorizations to complete them; within three months of the close of each financial year, does not prepare the summary financial statements in view of the inventory and a written report in which

he accounts for the liquidation operations during the past financial year; does not allow the members to exercise, during the liquidation period, their right to access company documents under the same conditions as previously; does not convene the members, at least once a year, to report to them on the summary financial statements in case of continuation of the company's operations; does not deposit in an account opened in a bank in the name of the company in liquidation, within fifteen days from the distribution decision, the sums allocated to distributions among the members and creditors; does not deposit, in a consignment account opened in the books of the Treasury, within one year from the closure of the liquidation, the sums allocated to creditors or members and not claimed by them.

Article 812-23

In application of Article 904 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, the liquidator who, in bad faith, commits the following acts shall be punished by imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs: makes use of the assets or credit of the company in liquidation in a manner he knows to be contrary to the interest of the company, for personal purposes or to favor another legal entity in which he has an interest, directly or indirectly; transfers all or part of the assets of the company in liquidation to a person who held in the company the capacity of general partner, limited partner, manager, member of the board of directors, general administrator or auditor, without having obtained the unanimous consent of the members or, failing that, the authorization of the competent court.

Paragraphe 8 : Des peines applicables aux infractions en cas d'appel public à l'épargne

Article 812-24

In application of Article 905 of the Uniform Act relating to commercial companies and economic interest groups, the presidents, directors or general managers of companies that issue securities offered to the public shall be punished by imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs: without inserting a notice in a journal authorized to receive legal notices, prior to any publicity measure; without the prospectuses and circulars reproducing the statements of the notice provided for in the paragraph above and containing the mention of the insertion of this notice in the journal authorized to receive legal notices with reference to the issue in which it is published; without the posters and advertisements in the newspapers reproducing the same statements or at least, an extract of these statements with reference to said notice, and indications of the issue number of the journal authorized to receive legal notices in which it is published; without the posters, prospectuses and circulars mentioning the signature of the person or representative of the company from which the offer emanates and specifying whether the securities offered are listed or not and, if so, on which stock exchange.
The persons who serve as intermediaries on the occasion of the transfer of securities, without the requirements set out in this article having been complied with, shall be punished by the penalties provided for in paragraph 1.

Section 4

Des peines applicables aux infractions prévues par l'acte uniforme portant organisation des procédures collectives d'apurement du passif

Paragraphe 1

Des peines applicables à la banqueroute simple et à la banqueroute frauduleuse

Article 812-25

In application of Article 228 of the Uniform Act on the organization of collective proceedings for clearing liabilities, any natural person in a state of cessation of payments who commits the following acts shall be guilty of simple bankruptcy and punished by imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs: enters into commitments deemed too large in view of his situation when he enters into them, without receiving values in exchange; with the intention of delaying the finding of the cessation of his payments, makes purchases with a view to resale below the market price or, with the same intention, uses ruinous means to obtain funds; without legitimate excuse, does not make to the registry of the competent court, the declaration of his state of cessation of payments within thirty days; keeps incomplete or irregular accounts or does not keep them in accordance with accounting rules and recognized practices of the profession having regard to the size of the business; having been declared twice in a state of cessation of payments within a period of five years, these proceedings are closed for insufficiency of assets.

Article 812-26

In application of Article 229 of the Uniform Act on collective proceedings for clearing debts, is guilty of fraudulent bankruptcy and punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, any natural person who, in case of cessation of payments: conceals their accounting records; misappropriates or dissipates all or part of their assets; fraudulently acknowledges being a debtor of sums they did not owe either in their records, or by published acts or private written commitments, or in their balance sheet; exercises the commercial profession contrary to a prohibition provided for by the Uniform Acts or by law; after cessation of payments, pays a creditor to the detriment of the estate; stipulates with a creditor particular advantages by reason of their vote in the deliberations of the estate, or makes with a creditor a particular agreement from which results for the latter, an advantage at the expense of the debtor's assets from the day of the opening decision.
Is punished by the penalties provided for fraudulent bankruptcy, any natural person who, on the occasion of a judicial settlement procedure: in bad faith, presents or causes to be presented a profit and loss account, a balance sheet, a statement of receivables or debts or an active and passive statement of privileges and securities, that is inaccurate or incomplete; without authorization from the president of the competent court, accomplishes one of the acts prohibited by Article 11 of the Uniform Act organizing collective proceedings for clearing debts.

Article 812-27

In application of Article 227 of the Uniform Act on the organization of collective proceedings for clearing debts, the penalties provided for in Articles 812-25 and 812-26 above are applicable to partners of commercial companies who have the status of merchants.:

Article 812-28

In application of Article 230 of the Uniform Act on the organization of collective proceedings for clearing debts, the penalties provided for in Articles 812-29, 812-30 and 812-31 below are applicable to natural persons who are directors of legal persons subject to collective proceedings and to their permanent representatives.

The directors referred to in this article mean all directors de jure or de facto and in a general manner, all persons having directly or through an intermediary, administered, managed or liquidated the legal person under the cover or in place of its legal representatives.

Article 812-29

In application of Article 231 of the Uniform Act on the organization of collective proceedings for clearing debts, are punished by imprisonment of one year to five years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, the directors referred to in Article 812-28 above who, in that capacity and in bad faith:
consume sums belonging to the legal person by making purely speculative transactions or fictitious transactions; make purchases with a view to resale below market price or employ ruinous means to procure funds, with the intention of delaying the finding of cessation of payments of the legal person; pay or cause to be paid a creditor to the detriment of the estate after cessation of payments of the legal person;
cause the legal person to contract on behalf of others, without it receiving values in exchange, commitments deemed too important having regard to its situation when these were contracted; keep, cause to be kept or allow to be kept irregularly or incompletely the accounting of the legal person under the conditions provided for in Article 228-4 of the Uniform Act on the organization of collective proceedings for clearing debts; fail to make at the registry of the competent court, within the period of thirty days, the declaration of the state of cessation of payments of the legal person; misappropriate or conceal, attempt to misappropriate or conceal a part of their assets or fraudulently acknowledge being debtors of sums they do not owe, with a view to removing all or part of their patrimony from the pursuit of the legal person in a state of cessation of payments or from those of the partners or creditors of the legal person.

Article 812-30

In application of Article 232 of the Uniform Act on the organization of collective proceedings for clearing debts, are guilty of simple bankruptcy and punished by imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs, the legal or de facto representatives of legal persons comprising partners indefinitely and jointly liable for the debts thereof who, without legitimate excuse, do not make at the registry of the competent court, the declaration of the state of cessation of payments within the period of thirty days or if this declaration does not include the list of jointly liable partners with the indication of their names and domiciles.

Article 812-31

In application of Article 233 of the Uniform Act on the organization of collective proceedings for clearing debts, are punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs, the directors referred to in Article 812-28 who fraudulently: conceal the books of the legal person; misappropriate or conceal a part of its assets; acknowledge the legal person as debtor of sums it does not owe, either in the records, or by public acts or commitments under private signature, or in the balance sheet; exercise the profession of director contrary to a prohibition provided for by the uniform acts or by law; stipulate with a creditor, in the name of the legal person, particular advantages by reason of their vote in the deliberations of the estate or who conclude with a creditor, a particular agreement from which results for the latter, an advantage at the expense of the assets of the legal person, from the day of the decision declaring the cessation of payments.
Are punished by the penalties provided for in paragraph 1, the directors referred to in Article 230 of the Uniform Act on the organization of collective proceedings for clearing debts, who on the occasion of a preventive settlement procedure: in bad faith, present or cause to be presented a profit and loss account, a balance sheet, a statement of receivables or debts or an active and passive statement of privileges and securities, that is inaccurate or incomplete; without authorization from the president of the competent court, accomplish one of the acts prohibited by Article 11 of the Uniform Act on the organization of collective proceedings for clearing debts.

Article 812-32

For the offences provided for in this section, the court seized may pronounce the prohibition from exercising the profession for a duration which may not exceed five years.

Paragraphe 2 : Penalties applicable to offences assimilated to bankruptcy

Article 812-33

In application of Article 240 of the Uniform Act on collective insolvency proceedings, the following are punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs: persons convicted of having, in the interest of the debtor, removed, concealed or hidden all or part of movable or immovable property, without prejudice to the application of criminal provisions relating to complicity; persons convicted of having fraudulently lodged in the collective proceedings, either in their own name or through interposition or impersonation, fictitious claims; persons who, trading under another person's name or under a fictitious name, in bad faith, misappropriate, conceal, attempt to misappropriate or conceal part of their property.

Article 812-34

In application of Article 241 of the Uniform Act on collective insolvency proceedings, the spouse, descendants, ascendants or collaterals of the debtor or his relatives by marriage up to the fourth degree who, without the debtor's knowledge, misappropriate, divert or conceal assets forming part of the debtor's estate in a state of cessation of payments, when the offences are committed to the detriment of an incapacitated person, are punishable by imprisonment of six months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to nine hundred thousand (900,000) CFA francs.

Article 812-35

In application of Article 242 of the Uniform Act on collective insolvency proceedings, even if there is an acquittal in the cases provided for in Articles 240 and 241 of the said Act, the court seized shall rule on damages and on the reintegration, into the debtor's estate, of property, rights or actions removed.

Article 812-36

In application of Article 243 of the Uniform Act on collective insolvency proceedings, any trustee in collective proceedings who: carries on a personal activity under cover of the debtor's business concealing his actions; disposes of the debtor's credit or property as his own; dissipates the debtor's property; abusively and in bad faith pursues, in his personal interest, either directly or indirectly, a loss-making operation of the debtor's business; acquires for his own account, directly or indirectly, the debtor's property, in violation of Article 51 of the Uniform Act on collective insolvency proceedings, is punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of two million (2,000,000) to ten million (10,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 812-37

In application of Article 244 of the Uniform Act on collective insolvency proceedings, a creditor who: stipulates with the debtor or with any person, special advantages by reason of his vote in the deliberations of the body of creditors; makes a private agreement from which results in his favour, an advantage at the expense of the debtor's estate from the day of the decision to open the collective proceedings, is punishable by imprisonment of six months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to nine hundred thousand (900,000) CFA francs.

Article 812-38

In application of the provisions of Article 245 of the Uniform Act on collective insolvency proceedings, the agreements provided for in Article 244 of the said Uniform Act are, in addition, declared null and void by the criminal court, with respect to all persons, even the debtor.
The judgment further orders the creditor to return, to the rightful party, the sums or securities he has received under the annulled agreement.

Article 812-39

In application of Article 246 of the Uniform Act on collective insolvency proceedings, without prejudice to the provisions relating to the criminal record, all conviction decisions rendered pursuant to the provisions of this section shall be, at the expense of those convicted, posted and published in a newspaper authorized to receive legal notices as well as by summary extract, in the Official Gazette mentioning the number of the legal notices newspaper where the first insertion is published.

Section 5

Penalties applicable to offences provided for by the uniform act on simplified recovery and enforcement proceedings

Article 812-40

In application of Article 36 paragraph 1 of the Uniform Act on simplified recovery and enforcement proceedings, the debtor under seizure or the third party holder in whose hands the seizure has been effected who does not produce the seized objects when he is deemed to be the custodian thereof, is punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 812-41

In application of Articles 64 paragraph 1-6, 100-6 and 109-7 of the Uniform Act on simplified recovery and enforcement proceedings, the debtor or the designated third party who, except in the cases provided for in Article 97 of the Uniform Act

mentioned above, moves or alienates the seized property placed under his custody, is punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 812-42

In application of Article 128 of the Uniform Act on simplified recovery and enforcement proceedings, the auctioneer or any other auxiliary of justice responsible for the sale who receives a sum above the bid, is punishable by imprisonment of one to six months and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.

Article 812-43

In application of Article 231 paragraph 1, 5 of the Uniform Act on simplified recovery and enforcement proceedings, the holder who, except in the cases provided for in Article 103 of the said Act, moves or alienates the seized property placed under his custody, is punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.

Section 6

Penalties applicable to offences provided for by the uniform act on accounting law and financial information

Article 812-44

In application of Article 111 of the Uniform Act on the organization and harmonization of business accounting, individual entrepreneurs and company directors who: for each financial year, do not prepare the inventory and do not establish the annual financial statements as well as, where applicable, the management report and the social balance sheet; knowingly prepare and communicate financial statements that do not present a true and fair view of the assets, financial position and results for the year, are punishable by imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of one million (1,000,000) to five million (5,000,000) CFA francs.

The court seized may, in addition, pronounce a prohibition from exercising the functions of manager of a Limited Liability Company (SARL), Director, Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Chief Executive Officer, Managing Director or Deputy Managing Director for a period that may not exceed five years.

Section 7

Penalties applicable to offences provided for by the uniform act on the law of cooperative societies

Article 812-45

In application of Article 386 of the Uniform Act on the law of cooperative societies, any person who, without being authorized in accordance with the legal and regulatory provisions applicable to this type of grouping, improperly uses the expressions cooperative societies, union of cooperative societies, federation of cooperative societies or confederation of cooperative societies, accompanied by any qualifier, as well as any denominations likely to suggest that it is one of the groupings cited in this article, shall be punished by imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of two hundred and fifty thousand (250,000) to one million (1,000,000) CFA francs.

BOOK IX: MISCELLANEOUS AND FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 900-1

Death sentences pronounced under the former law are automatically commuted to life imprisonment.

Article 900-2

Law No. 043/96/ADP of 13 November 1996 establishing the Penal Code is repealed. The following are also repealed: Articles 736 and 737 of Ordinance 68-7 of 21 February 1968 establishing the Code of Criminal Procedure; Articles 44 to 72, 82 of Law No. 017-99/AN of 29 April 1999 establishing the Drug Code; Articles 1 and 2 of Law No. 007-2004 of 6 April 2004 on the administration of community service work in Burkina Faso; Articles 1 to 5, 13 to 18 of Law No. 26-2008/AN of 8 May 2008 on the repression of acts of vandalism committed during demonstrations on public roads; Articles 1 to 12, 14 to 26 of Law No. 29-2008/AN of 15 May 2008 on combating trafficking in persons and related practices; Articles 1 to 4, 10, 16 to 22 of Law No. 17-2009/AN of 5 May 2009 on the repression of serious banditry; Articles 2 to 12, 14 of Law No. 060-2009/AN of 17 December 2009 on the repression of acts of terrorism in Burkina Faso; Articles 1 to 21 and 23 to 29 of Law No. 11-2014/AN of 17 April 2014 on the repression of the sale of children, child prostitution and child pornography;
Articles 87, 116 paragraph 4 and 121 of Law No. 015-2014/AN of 13 May 2014 on the protection of children in conflict with the law or in danger; Articles 1 to 11, 13, 14 to 16, 25 and 40 to 42 of Law No. 022-2014/AN of 27 May 2014 on the prevention and repression of torture and related practices; Articles 3, 42 to 86 of Law No. 04-2015/CNT of 3 March 2015 on the prevention and repression of corruption in Burkina Faso; Articles 5, 8 to 14, 18 and 19 of Law No. 061-2015/CNT of 6 September 2015 on the prevention, repression and reparation of violence against women and girls and the care of victims; Articles 2, 2 bis, 13, 15 to 15 quinquies of Law No. 084-2015/CNT of 17 December 2015 amending Law No. 060-2009/AN of 17 December 2009 on the repression of acts of terrorism in Burkina Faso.
Finally, all previous provisions to the contrary are repealed.

Article 900-3

This law shall be executed as law of the State.

Thus done and deliberated in public session in Ouagadougou, on 31 May 2018
