LAW N°06. 032 OF 27 DECEMBER 2006 ON THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AGAINST VIOLENCE IN THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

LAW N°06. 032 OF 27 DECEMBER 2006 ON THE PROTECTION OF WOMEN AGAINST VIOLENCE IN THE CENTRAL AFRICAN REPUBLIC

THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY HAS DELIBERATED AND ADOPTED,

THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC, HEAD OF STATE
PROMULGATES THE LAW THE CONTENT OF WHICH FOLLOWS
TITLE 1 GENERAL PROVISIONS CHAPTER 1: DEFINITIONS
Art. 1: Violence specifically directed against women means all acts of violence directed against the female sex, and causing or likely to cause women physical, sexual or psychological harm or suffering, including the threat of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether in public life or in private life.

Art. 2

Rape means an act of sexual penetration of any nature, committed on the person of another by violence, threat, coercion or surprise.

Art. 3

Pedophilia means any erotic attraction of an adult towards children.

Art. 4

Incest designates any sexual intercourse perpetrated on a person with whom one has ties of kinship, close or distant.

Art. 5

Harassment is considered to be the action of subjecting to incessant attacks and tormenting with obstinacy the person of another.

Art. 6

Procuring is the activity of one who favours the debauchery of another by serving as an intermediary.

Art. 7

Incitement of a minor to debauchery is the act of engaging them in the path of corruption and debauchery.

Art. 8

Pornography is a complacent representation of subjects in a literary, artistic or cinematographic work that is offensive to public morals.

CHAPTER II DIFFERENT CATEGORIES

OF VIOLENCE

Art. 9

Are considered as violence against women and punished in accordance with the provisions of this law, in addition to the above definitions, the following behaviours or acts:
intentional assault and battery;	ill-treatment;
public insults;	female genital excision including all interventions involving partial or total removal of the female genital organs performed for cultural or religious reasons or for any other non-therapeutic genital reason.

Art. 10: Also constitute a form of violence against women

ill-treatment during widowhood;	confiscation of the woman's personal property during widowhood;
levirate and sororate.

TITLE II PROTECTION OF WOMEN

CHAPTER 1 SOCIAL PROTECTION

Art. 11

Social Workers are responsible for providing assistance and aid to women in situations of danger.

Art.12

To this end, they have the mission to intervene in cases where the physical or moral integrity of the woman is threatened or affected as a result of the violence referred to above.

Any person is authorized to report to Social Workers, to the Public Prosecutor, to the gendarmerie or to the Police all cases of abuse against a woman.

Art. 13

In general, the Social Worker is responsible for taking all administrative measures aimed at safeguarding the woman victim of violence and informing the Judicial Police Officers and the Public Prosecutor if necessary.

CHAPTER II JUDICIAL PROTECTION

Art. 14: The Judge may be referred to by

the victim;	the Social Worker;
the Public Prosecutor;	public administrations working in the field of protection of women;	non-governmental organizations and other associations dealing with the protection of women;
competent judicial police officers.
The judge may refer himself in cases under this law.

Art. 15

The Judge may, before ruling, take a provisional measure based on the social worker's report concerning the need to remove the woman from the place of service if circumstances so require.
To this end, he may order the perpetrator of the abuse to contribute to the costs necessary for the execution of the measure.

Art. 16: The Judge may order one of the following measures

relocate the woman with her consent and place her in a host family;
maintain the woman with her consent with the host family and entrust the Social Worker with the follow-up.

In all cases, the Judge is required to subject the woman to a medical or psychological examination. The Judge's decisions are executed immediately and subject to appeal within a period of 10 days.

Art. 17

The Judge, if he finds an improvement in the woman's situation, may reconsider the measures he has taken concerning her.

The request may be submitted by one of the spouses, the parents or the guardian.

TITLE III PENAL PROVISIONS

Art. 18: Is liable to a fine of 100,001 to

500,000 CFA francs, any person who obstructs the Social Worker or competent Judicial Police Officers in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of their functions or who obstructs the proper conduct of inquiries and investigations by making false statements, by intentionally concealing the actual situation of the woman, notwithstanding the application of the provisions of the Penal Code which sanctions insult to a public official in the exercise of his functions.

Art. 19

Whoever, by traditional or modern methods, has performed or attempted to perform, or favoured excision or any other methods of female genital mutilation shall be punished by imprisonment of 2 to 5 years and a fine of 100,000 to 1,000,000 CFA francs.
The penalty shall be doubled in case of recidivism.

Art. 20

If the mutilations have resulted in the death of the victim, the perpetrator or perpetrators shall be sentenced to hard labour for life.

Art. 21

Is punished by a penalty of imprisonment of 6 months to 1 year and a fine of 50,000 to
500,000 CFA francs, anyone who, having knowledge of an excision already planned or performed, has not notified the public authorities.

Art. 22: Rape shall be punished by hard labour for a fixed term

Art. 23

Shall also be punished by hard labour for a fixed term, whoever has committed the crime of rape on a woman who is particularly vulnerable due to

a state of pregnancy, an illness, an infirmity or a physical or mental deficiency, or on a minor under fourteen years of age, or under threat of a weapon, or by two or more perpetrators or accomplices, or by a legitimate, natural or adoptive ascendant of the victim or by a person who has abused the authority conferred upon him by his functions.

Attempted rape shall be punished as rape itself.

Art. 24

Any unnatural act committed against a woman in a place open to the public or with an individual of the same sex shall be considered as public indecency and punished by imprisonment of 6 months to 3 years and a fine of 100,000 to 500,000 CFA francs.

Art. 25

The act of harassing a woman by using orders, threats or coercion with the aim of obtaining favours of a sexual nature by a person abusing the authority conferred upon him by his functions or position is punished by 6 months to 1 year of imprisonment and a fine of 50,000 to 500,000 CFA francs.

Art. 26

Shall be considered a procurer punishable by imprisonment of 1 to 5 years and a fine of 500,000 to 3,000,000 CFA francs, he or she who:
habitually aids, assists or knowingly protects the prostitution of others or soliciting for the purpose of prostitution;
in any form, shares the proceeds of the prostitution of others or receives subsidies from a person habitually engaging in prostitution;	knowingly lives with a person habitually engaging in prostitution and cannot justify resources corresponding to his or her lifestyle;
recruits, induces or maintains, even if of age, for the purpose of prostitution or delivers to prostitution or debauchery;	acts as an intermediary, in any capacity, between persons engaging in prostitution or debauchery and individuals who exploit or remunerate the prostitution or debauchery of others.

Art. 27

The penalty shall be imprisonment of 3 to 5 years and a fine of 500,000 to 3,000,000 CFA francs, in the case where:
the offense was committed against a minor;	the offense was accompanied by coercion, abuse of authority or fraud;
the perpetrator of the offense was carrying a visible or concealed weapon;	the perpetrator of the offense is the spouse, ascendant, guardian, teacher, paid servant of the victim or paid servant of the persons designated above, public official or minister of a religion;	the perpetrator of the offense is called upon to participate by virtue of his or her functions in the fight against prostitution, the protection of health or the maintenance of public order;
whoever, by threat, pressure, maneuver or by any other means, obstructs the action of prevention, control, assistance or re-education undertaken by qualified organizations in favor of persons engaging in prostitution or in danger of prostitution.

Art. 28

Shall be punished by imprisonment of 1 to 3 years and a fine of 500,000 to 1,000,000 CFA francs, whoever shall have committed an offense against morals by inciting to debauchery or by favoring the corruption of minors.
The same penalty shall be applied against whoever tolerates the practice of debauchery by persons engaging in prostitution in premises or locations at his or her disposal in any capacity whatsoever.
The occupant and the person engaging in debauchery are jointly and severally liable for payment of damages that may be awarded for disturbance to neighbors.

In case of habitual practice of the acts referred to above, termination of the lease and eviction of the tenant, subtenant, or occupant who engages in or tolerates it shall be pronounced by the Judge according to the emergency procedure at the request of the owner, principal tenant, occupant or neighbor of the building.

The attempt of the offense provided for in this article shall be punished by the same penalties as the offense itself.

Art. 29

Whoever shall have voluntarily inflicted blows or wounds or exercised violence and assault on a woman shall be punished by imprisonment of 1 month and 1 day to 2 years and a fine of 100,002 to 400,000 CFA francs or only one of these two penalties.

If the blows and violence have resulted in an illness or incapacity for personal work of more than
20	days,	the	penalty	shall	be	1	to	3	years of imprisonment and a fine of 100,002 to
1,000,000 CFA francs.
When these blows, wounds and violence are exercised on a woman in a state of pregnancy or nursing, the penalty shall be 1 to 3 years of imprisonment and a fine of 500,000 to
1,000,000 CFA francs.
If the blows, wounds and violence exercised on a woman in a state of pregnancy or a nursing mother result in an illness or incapacity for work of more than 20 days, the penalty shall be 2 to 5 years and a fine of 1,000,000 to 3,000,000 CFA francs.

If the blows, wounds or violence exercised on a woman shall have resulted in mutilation, amputation or deprivation of a limb, blindness, loss of an eye or other permanent infirmities, the guilty party shall be punished by hard labor for a term.

Art. 30

Whoever shall have voluntarily inflicted wounds or blows or exercised violence and assault or deprived of food a woman survivor on the occasion of the death of her spouse, mourning ceremony and widowhood shall be punished by imprisonment of 3 to 5 years and a fine of 1,000,000 to 2,000,000 CFA francs.

Art. 31

Except in the case of polygamous marriage, the spouse who shall have maintained a concubine at the conjugal domicile shall be punished by a penalty of imprisonment of 3 to 6 months and a fine of 100,002 to 400,000 CFA francs or only one of these two penalties.

TITLE IV FINAL PROVISIONS

Art. 32

The heads of health structures both public and private are required to ensure that victims of violence received in their respective centers or establishments are provided with first emergency care.

The competent public authorities must be informed without delay in order to consider the measures that are necessary.

Art. 33

The means of intervention of the Social Worker shall be determined by a regulatory text.

Art. 34: This law shall be registered and published in the Official Journal

GENERAL OF THE ARMY
François BOZIZE
