Visa: SGG

Visa: SGG

ORDINANCE NO. 003 /PR/2025
On the prevention and repression of violence
against women and girls in
the Republic of Chad

THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC,
HEAD OF STATE,
PRESIDENT OF THE COUNCIL OF MINISTERS;

Having regard to the Constitution;

Having regard to Law No. 035/CNT/2024 of 30 December 2024
authorizing the Government to legislate
by way of ordinances during the period from
1 to 31 January 2025;

The Council of Ministers consulted at home on
10 December 2024;

Order No. 003/PR/2025
concerning the prevention and combating of violence directed against women and girls in
the Republic of Chad

The President of the Republic,
Head of State,
President of the Council of Ministers;

Pursuant to the Constitution;

Pursuant to Law No. 035/CNT/2024 issued on 30 December
2024 concerning the granting to the Government of the power to enact laws by way of orders
during the period from 1 to 31 January 2025;

And after consultation with the Council of Ministers on 10 December 2024;

ORDERS:

TITLE ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS

CHAPTER I: DEFINITION OF

CONCEPTS AND THE PURPOSE OF THE LAW

Article 1: Definition of concepts

In this ordinance, the following terms mean:

Woman: A person of the female sex;

Girl: a female child under the age of
18 years;

Family: the nuclear family, the extended family, the
in-laws as well as the relationships,
responsibilities and cultural ties that define
identity and community;

Violence against women and
girls: all acts of violence directed against the
female sex and causing or likely to cause
women and girls harm or
physical, sexual or
psychological suffering including the threat of such acts,

The following order is issued:

TITLE ONE: GENERAL PROVISIONS

CHAPTER ONE: DEFINITION OF CONCEPTS AND THE PURPOSE OF THE LAW

Article 1: Definition of Concepts

For the purposes of this ordinance, the following terms shall have the meanings set forth opposite them:
Woman: a person of the female sex.

Girl: a female child under 18 years of age.

Family: the nuclear family, the extended family, the family of the husband or wife, in addition to the relationships, responsibilities and cultural ties that define identity and community.

Violence against women and girls: all acts of violence directed against the female sex which cause or may cause women and girls physical, sexual or psychological harm or suffering, including threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether in public or private life.

The violations include:
Physical, moral, sexual and psychological violence exercised within the family, such as beatings, marital rape, sexual assaults and attacks, female genital mutilation as provided for by the Chadian Penal Code, forced or early marriages, "honour" crimes and other traditional practices harmful to women.
Physical, moral, sexual and psychological violence exercised within the community, including rape, sexual assaults and attacks, sexual harassment, including cyber-harassment as provided for by the Chadian Penal Code, and intimidation at work, in educational institutions and other places, procuring, trafficking in persons, forced prostitution.

Under this ordinance, violence against women and girls also includes the refusal of any medical or paramedical officer to provide the required care to a woman during childbirth, or the failure to perform his professional duty.

Abortion: the act of using means or substances intended to cause the premature expulsion of the foetus or, more generally, the artificial or voluntary termination of pregnancy in a woman;

Harassment: the act of someone giving orders, using words, writings, messages, gestures, and doing so repeatedly, uttering threats, imposing constraints, exerting pressure or using any other means for the purpose of obtaining from a person in a situation of vulnerability or subordination favours of any nature whatsoever, including sexual, for his benefit or for the benefit of a third party against the will of the harassed woman;

Procuring: the activity of one who facilitates the debauchery of others by acting as an intermediary, thereby deriving benefit from the fruits of this activity;

Forced sterilization: the act of committing or causing to be committed on a woman without her free consent or without a justified medical decision, an act likely to deprive her of her biological and organic capacity to reproduce;

Rape: any act of vaginal, anal or oral penetration by the sex of another or vaginal or anal penetration by any object without the intelligent and voluntary consent of the person penetrated. However, consent remains invalid, even deliberate consent, when it concerns girls under eighteen (18) years of age.

The person penetrated is not obliged to fight against his or her attacker. Being married to the person penetrated is not an excuse for the crime of rape;

Violence in the family environment: abuse of power or intentional neglect with a view to dominating, subjugating, controlling or assaulting women and girls physically, verbally, psychologically, patrimonially, economically and sexually, inside or outside the family home, whether the aggressor is or has been linked to his victim by family relations;

Domestic violence: any physical or sexual violence committed by a person against the person of another when the two parties are married, cohabiting, or consanguineous, or living in the same house, or when the two parties have had an intimate relationship in the past but are no longer together;

Economic violence: the act of using one's means to slow down or prevent the economic or financial development of any person, or the act of preventing any person from enjoying his or her socio-economic rights;

Patrimonial violence: any act or neglect affecting the survival of the victim and consisting of transforming, withdrawing, destroying, withholding or misappropriating objects, personal documents, property and valuables, patrimonial rights or economic resources intended to cover his or her needs and which may extend to damage caused to property common to or belonging to the victim;

Physical violence: any type of act resulting in non-accidental harm, through the use of physical force or any type of weapon or object that may or may not cause internal, external or both injuries;

Psychological or moral violence: the act of subjecting any person to repeated actions or words having the object or effect of degrading living conditions likely to infringe his or her rights and dignity, to impair his or her physical or mental health or to compromise his or her projects or future.

It is also an act or neglect causing harm to psychological stability, abandonment, repeated inattention, excessive jealousy, insults and humiliation, devaluation, marginalization, lack of affection, indifference, infidelity, destructive comparisons, rejection, restriction of self-determination and threats; all situations that may lead the victim to sink into depression, to isolate himself or herself, to lose self-esteem, or even to commit suicide;

Sexual violence: any act of a sexual nature having the effect of degrading or causing harm to the body and/or sexuality of the victim and which, consequently, infringes his or her freedom, dignity and physical integrity. It is the expression of an abuse of power dictated by a dominant position over the woman who is thus denigrated and treated as an object; all other similar forms which harm or infringe the dignity, integrity or freedom of women and girls;

Zoophilia: the act of any person by trickery, violence, threats or by any form of coercion or artifice, to have sexual relations or to force a person to have sexual relations with an animal.

Article 2 : Objet de l'ordonnance

المادة2: الهدف من هذا الأمر

(1) The purpose of this ordinance is to combat all forms of violence against women and girls in the Republic of Chad, regardless of their age, race, ethnic origin, nationality, religion, disability, socioeconomic status or any other characteristic, regardless of the perpetrator of the offense, the context or the relationship between the victim and the perpetrator; in all contexts, including in times of peace and conflict, in private and public spaces, and in all sectors of society.

(2) Through its interdependent components, it aims to end violence against women and girls through a multisectoral and multidisciplinary response.

1. يهدف هذا الأمر إلى مكافحة جميع أشكال العنف ضد النساء والفتيات في جمهورية تشاد، بغض النظر عن أعمارهن، أو أعراقهن، أو انتماءاتهن العرقية، أو جنسياتهن، أو أديانهن، أو إعاقاتهن، أو أوضاعهن الاجتماعية والاقتصادية، أو أي خصائص أخرى، وبغض النظر عن مرتكب الجريمة، والسياق أو العلاقة بين الضحية والجاني؛ وذلك في جميع السياقات، بما في ذلك في أوقات السلم والنزاع، وفي الأماكن الخاصة والعامة، وفي جميع قطاعات المجتمع.

2. من خلال جوانبه المترابطة، يهدف هذا الأمر إلى إنهاء العنف ضد النساء والفتيات عبر استجابة متعددة القطاعات والتخصصات.

TITRE II : DES MESURES DE SENSIBILISATION, DE PREVENTION ET DE DETECTION

CHAPITRE II : DU DOMAINE EDUCATIF

الباب ا

لثاني: تدابير التوعية والوقاية والكشف

الفصل الثاني: المجال التعليمي

Article 3

Schooling is compulsory for all children without distinction of sex, race and religion, disability, ethnicity or any other consideration.

المادة 3

التعليم إلزامي لجميع الأطفال دون تمييز على أساس الجنس، أو العرق، أو الدين، أو الإعاقة، أو العرقية، أو أي اعتبار آخر.

Article 4

المادة 4

(1) The fight for equality between boys and girls constitutes a national priority. To this end, principles and teachings of mutual respect between the sexes, learning to live together, rejection and condemnation of violence, development of critical thinking and analysis against violence and all gender inequalities between women and men will be taken into account in teaching programs.

1. تُعد مكافحة عدم المساواة بين الأولاد والبنات أولوية وطنية. لهذا الغرض، سيتم تضمين مبادئ وتعاليم الاحترام المتبادل بين الجنسين، وتعليم الحياة المشتركة، ورفض وإدانة العنف، وتطوير التفكير النقدي والتحليل ضد العنف وجميع أشكال عدم المساواة بين النساء والرجال في برامج التعليم.

(2) These teachings at all levels must ensure training in the knowledge and respect of fundamental human rights and freedoms as well as understanding of concrete situations that violate them.

2. يجب أن تضمن هذه التعليمات على جميع المستويات تدريبًا على معرفة واحترام الحقوق والحريات الأساسية للأشخاص، وكذلك فهم الحالات العملية التي تنتهك هذه الحقوق.

(3) Similarly, the education system will include, in its quality principles, the elimination of obstacles and discrimination that make full equality between girls and boys difficult and especially violence against girls.

(4) All public and private institutions provide training adapted to the economic, social and cultural developments of the country and its environment.

Article 5

The school is responsible for transmitting and imparting knowledge and working methods. It aims for gender mixing and real equality between men and women, girls and boys, particularly in terms of guidance, detection of violence suffered by young people and the fight against sexism and risky behaviors.

Article 6

The ministries in charge of national education in collaboration with the ministry in charge of women and the ministry of justice adopt the necessary measures so that initial training programs for the teaching staff must include and be subject to evaluation a specific training policy on gender equality and the fight against violence against women and girls;

Article 7

(1) Public or private schools must provide for the immediate enrollment, in similar or related sections, of girls and young girls who are victims of violence and forced to change residence.

(2) Children affected by a change of residence caused by acts of violence against women and girls must also be taken into account.

Article 8

The State, local authorities and/or private structures must provide a comprehensive program of complementary and continuing training for professionals involved in the fight against violence against women and girls.

3. وباملثل، سيشمل النظام التعليمي، ضمن معايير الجودة، إزالة العقبات والتمييز التي تعيق تحقيق المساواة الكاملة بين الفتيات والأولاد، وخاصة العنف ضد الفتيات.

4. توفر جميع المؤسسات العامة والخاصة تعليمًا يتكيف مع التطورات الاقتصادية والاجتماعية والثقافية للبلاد وبيئتها.

المادة 5

تُكلف المدرسة بنقل المعرفة وأساليب العمل. وتهدف إلى تحقيق الاختلاط والمساواة الحقيقية بين الرجال والنساء، والفتيات والفتيان، خاصة في مجال التوجيه، وكشف العنف الذي يتعرض له الشباب، ومكافحة التمييز الجنسي والسلوكيات الخطرة.

المادة 6

تعتمد الوزارات المسؤولة عن التعليم الوطني، بالتعاون مع وزارة المرأة ووزارة العدل، التدابير اللازمة لضمان إدراج وتقييم سياسة تدريب محددة بشأن المساواة بين المرأة والرجل ومكافحة العنف ضد النساء والفتيات في برامج التدريب الأولي للهيئة التعليمية.

المادة 7

1. يجب على المدارس العامة أو الخاصة توفير تسجيل فوري في الفصول المماثلة أو ذات الصلة للفتيات والشابات ضحايا العنف اللواتي اضطررن إلى تغيير محل إقامتهن.

2. يجب أيضًا أخذ الأطفال المتأثرين بتغيير محل الإقامة الناتج عن أعمال العنف ضد النساء والفتيات في الاعتبار.

المادة 8

يجب على الدولة والهيئات المحلية و/أو الهياكل الخاصة توفير برنامج واسع للتدريب التكميلي والمستمر للمهنين المشاركين في مكافحة العنف ضد النساء والفتيات.

CHAPITRE III DU DOMAINE DE LA PUBLICITE ET DES MOYENS DE COMMUNICATION

Article 9

Any advertising that uses degrading, devaluing, dehumanizing and vexatious representations of women and girls is considered unlawful.

Article 10

1. The High Authority for Media and Audiovisual (HAMA) must ensure the fair representation of women and men by the media, particularly by avoiding as far as possible degrading and vexatious representations, by combating sexist stereotypes, by avoiding an unbalanced presence of persons of both sexes in broadcast programs.

2. The specifications of broadcasters will mandatorily include these principles. It must exercise its power of sanction on public and private media implicated.

3. It may suspend the marketing of unlawful content aimed at undermining the dignity of women and girls. It then informs the ministry in charge of the interior and refers the matter to the public prosecutor so that he may initiate the prosecutions provided for by the penal code.

CHAPITRE IV : DU DOMAINE SANITAIRE ET SOCIAL

Article 11

1. The State has the obligation to promote through socio-health structures, the early detection of cases of violence against women and girls. To this end, it must develop awareness programs, initial and continuing training of socio-health personnel, training and socio-economic reintegration of victims, with the aim of improving the holistic care of women and girls victims of violence.

2. Public and private social and health structures must help and support women and girls victims of violence.

الفصل الثالث: مجال الإعلان ووسائل الاتصال

Article 9

Any advertising that uses degrading, demeaning, dehumanizing or offensive representations of women and girls shall be considered illegal.

Article 10

1. The High Authority for Audiovisual Media (HAMA) must ensure fair representation of women and men in the media, particularly by avoiding degrading and offensive representations as much as possible, combating gender stereotypes, and avoiding unbalanced presence of persons of both sexes in broadcast programs.

2. The specifications for publishers shall mandatorily include these principles. The Authority must exercise its power to impose sanctions on public and private media that violate them.

3. The Authority may suspend the marketing of illegal content aimed at undermining the dignity of women and girls. In this case, it shall notify the Ministry of the Interior and refer the matter to the Public Prosecutor to take the legal measures provided for in the Criminal Code.

Chapter Four: Health and Social Domain

Article 11

1. The State has an obligation to promote early detection of cases of violence against women and girls through social and health structures. For this purpose, it must develop awareness programs and initial and continuing training for social and health workers, and training and socio-economic reintegration of victims with the aim of improving comprehensive care for women and girls victims of violence.

2. Public and private social and health structures must assist and support women and girls victims of violence.

Article 12

(1) The initial and continuing training of all health professionals as well as professionals in the social and medico-social sector includes specific teaching dedicated to violence perpetrated against women and girls and its consequences in terms of public health.

(2) This teaching shall be spread over all years of training with regard to initial training, including in a multidisciplinary manner, shall be evaluated and shall aim to promote holistic prevention and response to violence against women and girls.

(3) University administrations and competent schools must ensure that the training programs for medical, paramedical and social professionals include this training content on gender-based violence.

CHAPTER V: JUDICIAL AND PARAJUDICIAL DOMAIN

Article 13

The State has an obligation to promote judicial and parajudicial institutions for rapid and adequate handling of cases of violence against women and girls. For this purpose, it must:

(1) develop awareness programs, initial and continuing training for judicial and parajudicial personnel, with the aim of improving effective care and rehabilitation of women and girls victims.

(2) Given that most rapes and domestic violence occur in private places, hidden from the eyes of potential witnesses, Chadian justice must broaden the categories of evidence and take into account the oral testimonies of victims. In the absence of other elements of evidence, the testimony of a victim alone can support an intimate conviction.

Article 14

The initial and continuing training of all judicial and parajudicial professionals includes mandatory specific teaching dedicated to domestic and sexual violence and its consequences in terms of public health. This multidisciplinary teaching aims to promote prevention, assistance and rehabilitation of women and girls victims of violence and shall be subject to annual evaluation by the relevant ministries.

Article 15

(1) Each prosecutor's office must designate at least one of its trained members who will be responsible for representing the public prosecution in all cases of domestic and sexual violence against women and girls.

(2) Each court of first instance must designate at least one investigating judge who will be responsible for investigating all cases of domestic and sexual violence against women and girls.

(3) The trial bench must include trained judges with expertise in the field of gender-based violence.

Article 16

(1) The State must strengthen the capacities of judicial police officers so that in each police station or gendarmerie brigade, cases of violence against women and girls are handled quickly and adequately.

(2) University administrations and competent schools must ensure that the training programs for judicial and parajudicial professionals, armed forces, public security and similar personnel include this training content.

TITLE III: RIGHTS OF WOMEN AND GIRLS VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE

CHAPTER VI: RIGHT TO INFORMATION, SOCIAL AID AND FREE LEGAL AND JUDICIAL ASSISTANCE

Article 17

(1) The State must make effective the enjoyment by women and girls of their rights to physical and moral integrity, to freedom, to security as well as to equality and non-discrimination on grounds of sex.

(2) The State ensures free legal aid and judicial assistance for women and girls victims of violence.

(3) Justice must guarantee rapid and adequate treatment of all cases of violence against women and girls.

Article 18

(1) All public and private structures must support and refer women and girls who are victims of violence to specialized centers in order to enable them to benefit from adequate holistic care services.

(2) Holistic care services in specialized centers include:
psychosocial and psychiatric support;
medical support;
legal and judicial support;
economic reintegration.

Article 19

Minor girls who are in the custody and supervision of the assaulted person are also entitled to comprehensive social assistance through these multisectoral services.

Article 20

(1) Women victims of violence, including young girls threatened with forced or arranged marriage, placed young girls, sexually abused, are considered as priority in access to reception centers.

(2) In cases of domestic or marital violence where both parties occupy the same dwelling, the State ensures the safety of the person subjected to violence.

CHAPTER VII: RIGHTS RELATED TO WORK

Article 21

The female employee who is a victim of violence within or outside her work organization shall be entitled, upon her request and after the favorable opinion of the occupational physician, to the temporary reduction or reorganization of her working time, to a geographical transfer, to an assignment to another workplace annexed to her organization, to the suspension of her employment contract and to resignation without notice. Upon expiration of the suspension of her employment contract, the female employee shall resume her previous employment.

Article 22

(1) Absences or non-compliance with working hours justified by the physical or psychological situation of the female employee related to violence against women may only give rise to sanctions upon decision of social services, support services or health services. The employer must be informed within seventy-two (72) hours.

(2) The female employee benefits from a guarantee of remuneration during these absences.

Article 23

The head of the enterprise or work structure must take all necessary measures to prevent, put an end to and/or sanction any statement, act or behavior of whatever nature based on sex, having the object or effect of violating the rights and dignity of the woman or young girl, or of creating an intimidating, hostile, degrading, humiliating or offensive environment, in particular by informing female employees, establishing investigation procedures and conservatory measures.

Article 24

The occupational physician is authorized to propose individual measures such as transfers or transformations of positions justified by considerations relating in particular to age, physical resistance, violence suffered by women and young girls within or outside the enterprise or to the physical and mental health condition of workers.

Article 25

(1) The woman, public service agent, victim of violence, who would be obliged to abandon her work position in the locality where she was in service, in order to ensure the effectiveness of her protection or her right to integrated social assistance, shall enjoy a preferential right to occupy another work position appropriate to her corps and her grade, presenting analogous characteristics, which would be vacant and to be filled.

(2) The competent public administration shall be required to inform the woman victim of violence of the vacant positions to be filled in the same locality or in the localities that the person concerned would request expressly.

Article 26

Women, public service agents, victims of violence, benefit from the same conditions provided for in Articles 21, 22, 23, 24 and 25 of this ordinance.

TITLE IV: INSTITUTIONAL FRAMEWORK

CHAPTER VIII: CREATION OF COMPETENT STRUCTURES

Article 27

(1) The Government formulates and implements public policies on combating violence against women and girls.

(2) The State establishes appropriate mechanisms for multisectoral response to violence against women and girls.

TITLE V: CIVIL AND CRIMINAL PROVISIONS

CHAPTER IX: PROVISIONS OF CIVIL ORDER

Article 28

When, in application of this ordinance, a woman, girl, parent, guardian or person having responsibility for a minor girl brings a matter before a court for violations of her physical or psychological integrity, or that of children, the residence of the child is automatically determined by the competent judge in favor of the victim. The decision may be modified by the judge or the court according to the judgment.

Article 28

When, pursuant to this ordinance, a woman, or girl, or parent, or guardian, or person responsible for a minor girl brings an action before a court due to violations of her physical or psychological integrity, or that of children, the residence of the child is automatically determined by the competent judge in favor of the victim. The decision may be modified by the judge or the court according to the judgment.

CHAPTER X: CRIMINAL PROVISIONS

Article 29

For any criminal offense that punishes physical, psychological, sexual or economic violence, the fact that the victim and the perpetrator enjoy a family relationship, as defined by this ordinance, shall be considered as an aggravating circumstance.

Article 30

1. Any person who is guilty or complicit in a forced or arranged marriage with respect to a woman or girl, as defined by this ordinance, is punished by imprisonment of five (5) years to ten (10) years and a fine of 500,000 to 5,000,000 francs (

article 368 para 1 of the Penal Code);

2. The perpetrator is deprived of parental authority or any possibility of being a guardian or curator for a period of ten (10) years, in accordance with article 368 para 2 of the Penal Code.

3. All persons who are complicit in the planning and/or execution of such a marriage or cohabitation are equally guilty to the same extent as the principal perpetrator.

Article 31

the following acts of violence are punished in accordance with the provisions below:

1. domestic violence is punished by imprisonment of six (6) months to three (3) years and a fine of 500,000 to 5,000,000 CFA francs.

2. Assault and battery are punished by imprisonment ranging from 1 to 20 years depending on the cases (articles 307 to 310 and 357 of the Chadian Penal Code).

3. Degrading, humiliating or inhuman treatment likely to cause psychological distress: Imprisonment of six (6) months to three (3) years and a fine of 500,000 to 5,000,000 CFA francs.

Article 32

the following acts of violence of a sexual nature are also punished in accordance with this ordinance:

(1) Sexual harassment: Imprisonment of 6 months to 3 years and fine of 1,000,000 to 5,000,000 FCFA.

(2) Rape is punished by imprisonment of eight (8) to fifteen (15) years.

(3) According to certain circumstances (rape of a minor, rape followed by torture, with use or threat of a weapon, committed while intoxicated or under the influence of narcotics, by an ascendant or person having legal authority over the victim, rape resulting in the death of the victim, etc.: the quantum varies from 10 to 20 years, from 15 to 20 years and from 20 to 30 years of imprisonment.

(4) Degrading sexual activities (incest) on a woman or girl: Imprisonment of one (1) year to five (5) years and a fine of 1,000,000 to 5,000,000 CFA francs.

(5) Sexual assault, sexual intercourse or touching of a sexual nature on a girl under 13 years of age: Imprisonment of five (5) years to ten (10) years.

(6) The completed attempt shall be punished by the penalty for rape.

Article 33

: acts of violence against minors are prohibited;

(1) The debauchery of a minor is punished by imprisonment of one (1) to five (5) years and a fine of 1,000,000 to 5,000,000 FCFA for anyone who incites, encourages or facilitates the debauchery of a girl who has not reached the age of civil majority.

Article 34

female genital mutilation/Excision is punished by imprisonment ranging from one (1) to ten (10) years depending on the cases (

article 318

para 1 and 2); closure of professional premises and prohibition from practicing the profession for medical personnel (

article 318 para 3 of the Penal Code)

Article 35

violence committed in the context of widowhood rites accompanied by deprivation of food and destruction or confiscation of the victim's personal effects is punished by imprisonment of three (3) years to six (6) years and a fine of 2,000,000 to 5,000,000 CFA francs or one of these two penalties.

Article 36

(1) All traditional practices harmful to women constitute common law offenses and are punished by the texts in force in the Republic of Chad.

(2) All other acts of violence not specifically provided for by this ordinance are punished in accordance with the legislation in force.

TITLE VI: MISCELLANEOUS AND FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 37

Decrees shall specify, as necessary, the modalities of application of this ordinance.

Article 38

All previous provisions contrary to this ordinance are repealed.

Article 39

This ordinance shall be registered, published in the Official Gazette of the Republic and executed as law of the State.

1. All traditional practices harmful to women constitute common law offences and are punishable under the texts in force in the Republic of Chad.

2. All other acts of violence not specifically provided for in this ordinance shall be punished in accordance with the legislation in force.

TITLE VI: MISCELLANEOUS AND FINAL PROVISIONS

Article 37

The methods of application of this ordinance shall be determined by decrees, as necessary.

Article 38

All previous provisions contrary to this ordinance are repealed.

Article 39

This ordinance shall be registered, published in the Official Gazette of the Republic and executed as law of the State.

N'Djamena, 21 January 2025

Marshal MAHAMAT IDRISS DEBY ITNO
Marshal Mahamat Idriss Deby Itno
