Chad

Chad
Law No. 001/PR/2017 of 8 May 2017 establishing the Penal Code
1

Book 1 ‐ General Provisions

Title 1 ‐ Criminal Law

Chapter 1 ‐ General Principles Art.1.‐

Criminal law is to be strictly construed.

Art.2

‐ Criminal courts do not have jurisdiction to interpret administrative acts, whether regulatory or individual, and to assess their legality even if the solution of the criminal proceedings before them depends on such examination. They are required to stay proceedings pending the decision of the administrative court on the preliminary question raised.

Chapter 2 ‐ Application of Criminal Law in Time

Art.3

‐ Acts not definitively judged before the express or tacit repeal of the criminal law cease to be punishable.

Art.4

‐ Any new and more lenient criminal provision applies immediately to offences not definitively judged on the day it enters into force.
If the new criminal provision is more severe, offences committed before it enters into force continue to be judged in accordance with the more lenient provisions of the old law.

Art.5

‐ Any penalty or security measure immediately ceases to be executed:
2

• a) imposed by reason of an act which, under the new law, no longer constitutes an offence;
• b) or which is abolished subsequent to conviction under the new law.

Chapter 3 ‐ Application of Criminal Law in Space

Art.6

‐ Criminal law applies to any act constituting an offence committed on national territory.
National territory includes territorial lake waters, airspace as well as vessels and aircraft registered in the Republic of Chad.
However, no member of the crew of a foreign vessel or aircraft who commits an offence on board against another member of the crew, even within territorial lake waters or airspace, may be tried by the courts of the Republic unless the assistance of the local authority has been requested or public order has been compromised.

Art.7.‐ Criminal law applies

• a) to any offence one of whose constituent elements occurred on its territory;
• b) to offences against the security of the State, counterfeiting of the State seal or national currency in circulation, even committed abroad.
However, no foreigner may be tried by the courts of the Republic for the offences referred to in paragraph b above, unless he has been arrested on the territory of the Republic or has been extradited there.

Art.8.‐ Also subject to criminal law are

• a) acts constituting complicity in and attempt of these offences committed on the territory of the Republic with a view to committing an offence abroad, if that offence is also punishable under foreign law;
• b) the same acts committed abroad with a view to committing an offence on the territory of the Republic.

Art.9

‐ Criminal law applies to acts committed abroad by a Chadian or by a resident, provided that these acts are punishable by the law of the place where they were committed and are classified as crimes or délits by the laws of the Republic.
A citizen or resident guilty of a délit committed against a private individual may, however, only be tried by the courts of the Republic under this article upon prosecution by the Public Prosecutor seized of a complaint or official denunciation to the Government of the Republic by the Government of the country where the act was committed.
3

In the case provided for in this article, the penalty incurred may not exceed that fixed by foreign law.

Art.10

‐ Criminal law applies to piracy, trafficking in persons, trafficking of persons, recruitment of children into armed forces and groups, drug trafficking, trafficking in toxic waste, money laundering, cybercrime, corruption and related offences, committed even outside the territory of the Republic.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph I above, a foreigner may only be tried on the territory of the Republic for the acts referred to in this article and committed abroad if he has been arrested on the territory of the Republic and has not been extradited.
In this case, only the Public Prosecutor may initiate public prosecution.

Art.11

‐ Any person on Chadian territory who has committed abroad one of the following offences may be prosecuted and tried on the territory of the Republic:
• a) war crimes provided for in articles 296 to 299 of this Code;
• b) crimes against humanity provided for in articles 292 to 295 of this Code;
• c) the crime of genocide provided for in articles 303 to 306 of this Code.

Chapter 4 ‐ Foreign Criminal Law and Sentences

Art.12

‐ Subject to articles 8 and 9 above, foreign criminal law has no effect before the courts of the Republic.

Art.13

‐ Criminal sentences pronounced by foreign courts produce effect on national territory only if the act is classified as a common law crime or délit by national criminal law and subject to the regularity of the sentence, its final character and its conformity with public policy.
Foreign criminal sentences:
• a) are taken into consideration for recidivism, for the granting or revocation of suspended sentence, for the revocation of conditional release, for rehabilitation and amnesty;
• b) preclude any new prosecution for the same acts on national territory.

Art.14

‐ When the sentences referred to and recorded under the conditions provided for in the preceding article have been pronounced against citizens or residents and have not been executed in another country, they are enforceable on national territory, unless the convicted person has benefited from conditional release, has been pardoned or amnestied, or his sentence has been time-barred.
4

It is for the court seized under the conditions provided for in the preceding article to order execution of the sentence.

Title 2 ‐ Offences, Penalties and Security Measures

Chapter 1 ‐ Preliminary Provisions

Art.15.‐ Offences are defined by law

Penalties and security measures are fixed by law and are imposed only by reason of legally provided offences.

Art.16

‐ Offences are classified as crimes, délits and contraventions according to the principal penalties that sanction them.
Classified as crimes are offences punishable by life imprisonment or a custodial sentence for a term whose minimum exceeds ten years.
Classified as délits are offences punishable by a custodial sentence or a fine when the custodial sentence incurred exceeds ten days but does not exceed ten years or when the minimum fine exceeds 25,000 FCFA.
Classified as contraventions are offences punishable by imprisonment that may not exceed ten days or a fine that may not exceed 25,000 FCFA.
The nature of an offence is not modified:
• a) when, as a result of the admission of an excuse or mitigating circumstances, the penalty imposed is that relating to another category of offences;
• b) in the cases of aggravation provided for in articles 72 and 73 below.

Art.17

‐ Penalties are principal, alternative, accessory or complementary.
Accessory penalties are attached to penalties pronounced for crimes and apply automatically.
Complementary penalties are left to the judge's discretion in cases provided for by law.

Art.18.‐ Principal penalties are

• a) life imprisonment or imprisonment for a fixed term;
• b) fine.

Art.19.‐ Alternative penalties are

• a) day-fine penalty;
• b) community service work.
5

Art.20.‐ Security measures are

• a) confinement in a health institution;
• b) special confiscation.

Chapitre 2 ‐ De la peine d'emprisonnement

Art.21

‐ Imprisonment is a custodial penalty for life or for a fixed term which is served
in a penitentiary institution and under conditions established by texts relating to the
penitentiary regime.

Art.22

‐ If the convicted person is not in a state of provisional detention or if an arrest warrant or committal
warrant is not issued against him at the hearing under the conditions provided for by the rules of criminal
procedure, the custodial penalty may only be put into execution when the conviction has
become final.
If a woman sentenced to a custodial penalty is pregnant or has just given birth,
she serves her sentence only three months after giving birth.
The pregnant woman or the woman who has just given birth, placed in provisional detention, continues
until the expiry of the period referred to in the preceding paragraph to benefit from the provisional detention
regime.
The husband and wife convicted, even for different offences, of a sentence
of imprisonment of less than one year and not detained on the day of judgment may, upon their
request, not serve their sentence simultaneously if, proving a certain common domicile,
they have in their care and under their custody a child under the age of eighteen.

Art.23

‐ The sentence of imprisonment in days is calculated by twenty-four hours. The sentence of one
month is thirty days.
The sentence expressed in months and years is calculated from date to date.
Subject to the provisions of Article 30 below, the starting point of the sentence is fixed:
• a) on the day when the convicted person is incarcerated in execution of the conviction;
• b) in case of merger of sentences, on the day of the first incarceration in execution of one
of the merged convictions.
In case of escape, the period during which the convicted person was on the run is excluded from the calculation of the
duration of the sentence.

Art.24

‐ The duration of provisional detention is fully deducted from the custodial
sentence pronounced.
6

When there has been provisional detention and the sentence pronounced is a fine, the jurisdiction
seized may, by way of compensation, exempt the convicted person from payment of all or part
of it.

Chapitre 3 ‐ Des peines alternatives

Art.25

‐ When a jurisdiction pronounces against a person found guilty of an offence, a
firm sentence of imprisonment equal to or less than one year, it may substitute for said sentence
a day-fine penalty consisting, for the convicted person, in paying a sum of money whose
total amount results from the fixing, in the decision, of a daily contribution for
a certain number of days.
The amount of each day-fine is determined taking into account the resources and
charges of the convicted person.
The number of day-fines is fixed having regard to the circumstances of the commission of
the offence. It may not exceed one hundred and eighty days.
The day-fine penalty may not be pronounced against the accused if the latter expresses his refusal or
is not present at the hearing.
The right to refuse is recalled to the person concerned by the President of the jurisdiction, after the declaration
of guilt and the fixing of the firm sentence.
The answer to the question asked pursuant to this paragraph is recorded in the hearing
minutes.
In case of non-execution of the day-fine penalty, the convicted person is summoned by the Public
Prosecutor or cited to appear at his request before the President of the jurisdiction having pronounced the
conviction, for the purpose of explaining the non-execution.
If the non-execution is due, according to the assessment of the President of the jurisdiction concerned, to legitimate reasons
not attributable to the convicted person, the latter is, by order, referred back to the effective
execution of the sentence initially pronounced.
If the reasons invoked by the convicted person to explain the non-execution of the sentence are not
recognized as well-founded, the President of the jurisdiction concerned issues against him, by order,
a committal warrant with a view to the execution of the sentence of imprisonment initially pronounced
as indicated in paragraph 1 above.
If the convicted person does not comply with the summons or the citation, the President of the jurisdiction
concerned issues against him, by order, an arrest warrant with a view to the execution of the sentence
of imprisonment initially pronounced as indicated in paragraph 1 above.
The orders taken pursuant to paragraphs 8, 9 and 10 above are not subject to appeal.
7

Art.26

‐ When a jurisdiction pronounces against a person found guilty of an offence a
firm sentence of imprisonment equal to or less than one year, it may, by way of substitution, order
that the convicted person shall perform, for a duration of between 120 hours, or 15 days, and 240
hours, or 30 days, unpaid community service work for the benefit of a legal person
under public law or an association authorized to implement community service work.
The penalty of community service work may not be pronounced against the accused if the latter suffers
from an obvious physical or mental incapacity to perform such a measure, expresses his refusal
or is not present at the hearing. The right to refuse is recalled to the person concerned, after the declaration
of guilt and the fixing of the firm sentence.
The accused's answer to the question asked pursuant to this paragraph is recorded in the hearing
minutes.
The penalty of community service work is chosen from a list of community service work drawn up by
deliberation of the competent body of the decentralized territorial collectivity of the jurisdiction of the
competent jurisdiction.
The list of community service work is deposited at the registry of the competent jurisdictions in criminal
matters at the beginning of each judicial year and posted on the doors of the Palaces of Justice and
buildings that are seats of decentralized territorial collectivities and common houses.
In case of non-execution of the penalty of community service work, the convicted person is summoned by the
Public Prosecutor or cited to appear at his request before the President of the jurisdiction having
pronounced the conviction, for the purpose of explaining the non-execution observed.
If the non-execution is due, according to the assessment of the President of the jurisdiction, to valid reasons
not attributable to the convicted person, the latter is, by order, referred back to the effective
execution of the community service work.
If the reasons invoked by the convicted person to explain the non-execution of the sentence are not
recognized as valid, the President of the jurisdiction issues against him, by order, a committal
warrant with a view to the execution of the sentence of imprisonment initially pronounced as
indicated in paragraph 1 above.
If the convicted person does not comply with the summons or the citation, the President of the jurisdiction
issues against him by order, an arrest warrant with a view to the execution of the sentence
of imprisonment initially pronounced as indicated in paragraph 1 above.
The orders taken pursuant to paragraphs 5, 6 and 7 above are not subject to appeal.
8

Chapter 4 ‐ Accessory Penalties

Art.27

‐ Civic degradation is an accessory penalty to any conviction for a crime. Civic
degradation includes:
• a) dismissal and exclusion from all functions, employment or public offices;
• b) deprivation of all civic and political rights and of the right to wear a decoration;
• c) incapacity to be an assessor in a court, expert, officer of justice, witness in
any act and to testify in court, other than to provide simple information;
• d) incapacity to be a guardian, deputy guardian, curator or legal adviser, except for one's
own children and to be part of a family council
• e) deprivation of the right to carry weapons, to keep a school, to teach and to be employed
in an educational establishment as a professor, teacher or supervisor;
• f) deprivation of the right to direct or manage a capital company and to be part of the
board of directors of such a company.

Chapter 5 ‐ Complementary Penalties

Art.28.‐ The complementary penalties are

• prohibition from residence:
• prohibition from the territory;
• prohibition of certain rights;
• confiscation of certain property;
• closure of an establishment;
• prohibition from exercising a profession or an activity;
• publication of the conviction.
Except in cases where the pronouncement of a complementary penalty is mandatory for the judge, any
decision must include a statement of the reasons justifying the pronouncement of a
complementary penalty.
Complementary penalties may be cumulated, except in case of incompatibility. Difficulties
of execution are submitted by the Public Prosecutor to the jurisdiction that pronounced the last
conviction.

Art.29

‐ Prohibition from residence consists in the prohibition made to the convicted person from appearing in
certain places for a certain duration which may not exceed five years in the case of an offence and
ten years in the case of a crime.
Prohibition from residence includes measures of supervision and assistance. Foreigners
may be prohibited from residence throughout the national territory.
9

The pronouncement of the penalty of prohibition from residence is left to the discretion of the judge, unless
otherwise ordered by law. It may not, however, be pronounced as an accessory to penalties
of less than one year of imprisonment.
The list of prohibited places is fixed by the judgment.
Prohibition from residence runs from the date of final or conditional release. In case of
revocation of conditional release, the prohibition is suspended during the time of the
new incarceration.
If no penalty of imprisonment has been pronounced or if the convicted person has benefited from a suspended sentence or
if the penalty of imprisonment has expired on the day of conviction, the prohibition runs from the day
when the decision became final.
Violations of the decision of prohibition from residence are punished by fifteen days to one year
of imprisonment and a fine of 50,000 to 500,000 F.

Art.30

‐ Prohibition from the territory is that made to the foreign convicted person from entering and residing
in the territory of the Republic after the execution of his sentence and his expulsion.
Prohibition from the national territory is pronounced in cases where it appears necessary, by reason of
the nature of the offence and the personality of the convicted person, to prevent him from appearing on the
national territory, when it appears that his presence involves risks of commission of
new acts.
When it has a limited duration, prohibition from the territory may not exceed five years in the case
of an offence and ten years in the case of a crime.

Art.31

‐ In cases of conviction for crimes specifically provided for by law, the
confiscation for the benefit of the State of all present property of the convicted person, of whatever nature
it may be, movable or immovable, or only of a portion of such property, may be
pronounced, subject to the rights acquired by third parties, in particular the victims of the offence.
The alienation of confiscated property shall be pursued by the domain administration in the
forms prescribed for the sale of property of the State.
Subject to the rights of third parties in good faith, the courts may pronounce in all
cases the confiscation either of the corpus delicti when the property belongs to the convicted person, or of
things produced by the offence, or of things which have served or which have been intended to
commit it, or of things which have been given or offered to incite to commit it.

Art.32

‐ In case of conviction for a crime, the jurisdiction may pronounce the dissolution of the
legal person when it is established that it is the principal author of the offence.
10

Art.33

‐ In cases where the competent jurisdiction may order the closure of a
commercial or industrial establishment or of a professional premises having served to commit
an offence, this measure entails the prohibition for the convicted person or for the third party to whom the
convicted person has sold, transferred or leased the establishment or the professional premises from exercising in the
same premises the same trade, the same industry or the same profession.

Art.34

‐ In cases which they shall assess and in those specifically provided for by law, the courts
may order that their decision be published at the expense of the convicted person, for a duration of two
months at most in case of conviction for a crime or offence and of fifteen days at most, in
case of a contravention.
The decision fixes the modalities of this publication and the maximum amount of expenses to be incurred.
In case of suppression, concealment or total or partial tearing of
posters ordered by the judgment of conviction, the integral execution of the
provisions of the judgment relating to posting shall be proceeded with again.
When the suppression, concealment or total or partial tearing has been carried out
voluntarily by the convicted person, or at his instigation or by his orders, it shall entail against
him, the application of a penalty of imprisonment of one month to six months and a fine of 50,000 to
500,000 FCFA.

Art.35

‐ Persons convicted for the same crime or for the same offence or for
related crimes and offences which are the subject of the same prosecution are held jointly and severally liable for
restitutions, damages and costs.
In case of concurrence of the fine with restitutions and damages, if the property of the
convicted person is insufficient, the latter convictions shall obtain preference.
The execution of convictions to the fine and to costs may then be pursued by way
of constraint by body.

Art.36

‐ In case of conviction for a crime or offence, the competent jurisdiction may order,
according to the nature of the offence committed by the legal person and without exclusion of other
accessory penalties, either its exclusion from public contracts permanently or for a determined
duration, or also prohibit it for a determined duration from making a public call for
savings or from issuing cheques other than those which permit the withdrawal of funds by
the enterprise itself from the drawee or those which are certified, or further prohibit it from using
payment cards for a determined duration.
In the case of a contravention, in addition to the measures indicated in paragraph 1 above, the court
may also pronounce the confiscation of property and other measures determined by law.
11

Chapter 6 ‐ Security Measures

Art.37

‐ In the event of acquittal or discharge due to insanity of the perpetrator of a crime or offence
punishable by imprisonment of at least two years, the court shall order in its
decision the confinement of the person concerned in a special health institution, when the
liberty of the person concerned is recognized as dangerous to public order.
The medical situation of the person whose confinement has been ordered shall be reviewed at least once
per year.
Only the court that ordered the confinement may terminate it, after opinion from the
competent medical authority certifying that the liberty of the confined person no longer presents any danger to
public order.

Art.38

‐ When an alcoholic, drug addict or person suffering from a mental pathology is
convicted of a crime or offence punishable by imprisonment of at least two years, the
court seized may order their confinement in a special health institution.
Confinement for the reasons indicated in this article may not exceed two years for the
treatment of an alcoholic or drug addict and five years for the treatment of a mentally
ill person.
The court that ordered the confinement may shorten the period initially fixed, after opinion from the
competent medical authority certifying that the liberty of the confined person no longer presents any danger
to public order.

Art.39

‐ Objects and substances whose manufacture, possession, sale or use are unlawful
shall be confiscated and destroyed even if they do not belong to the convicted person or the prosecution has not
resulted in conviction.
The confiscation and destruction of these objects and substances shall be ordered by the decision of
conviction.

Chapter 7 ‐ Non-Cumulation and Order of Execution of Sentences

Art.40

‐ In the event that an individual is the subject of the same prosecution for several crimes or offences
or related contraventions, only the most severe penalty incurred shall be imposed.
In the event that an individual is the subject of several convictions for crimes or offences resulting
from separate prosecutions, the merging of principal sentences may be ordered by the court
seized of the latest prosecutions. In case of cumulation of sentences, the total of sentences imposed
may not exceed the legal maximum of the penalty incurred for the most severely
punished offence.
12

When a principal sentence has been the subject of a commutation or gracious remission, account shall be taken,
for the cumulation of sentences, of the sentence resulting from the commutation or remission.
The rule of non-cumulation of sentences does not apply to two convictions of which the first
had become final before the commission of the acts that motivated the second.
In matters of contraventions, sentences are always cumulated, unless the court decides
otherwise.
In case of commission of several offences, sentences other than principal sentences
as well as security measures are cumulated, unless otherwise decided by the court.

Art.41

‐ Custodial sentences shall be executed in the chronological order of the
notification of detention orders to the convicted person.
Accessory sentences are immediately applicable.
The confinement of the acquitted mentally ill person is immediately applicable.
The confinement of the convicted person is applicable upon expiration of the principal sentence or its
suspension, in case of alcoholism, drug addiction or mental pathology.
If, during the execution of one of the measures indicated in paragraphs 3 and 4 above, the person
concerned incurs, for another crime or offence, a custodial sentence, the execution of the
security measure is suspended and the new sentence is served first.

Chapter 8

‐ Modalities of Execution of Imprisonment Sentences Section 1 ‐ Simple
Suspension

Art.42

‐ In case of conviction for a crime or offence to an imprisonment sentence less than
or equal to five years or to a fine and if the convicted person has not been the subject of a prior
conviction to imprisonment, the court seized may order, unless otherwise provided by
law and by reasoned decision, that execution of the principal sentence shall be suspended.
If during the period of five years from the day on which the judgment or ruling became final, the
convicted person has not committed any crime or offence followed by conviction to imprisonment or to
a more serious sentence, the conviction shall be deemed null and void.
In the contrary case, the first sentence shall be executed first without being merged
with the second and the penalties for recidivism shall be incurred.
13

The suspension does not extend to payment of court costs and damages.
After having pronounced the conviction decision, the President of the court warns the
convicted person of the provisions of paragraphs 2 and 3 of this article and mention of this
warning is made in the hearing record.

Section 2 ‐ Suspension with Probation

Art.43

‐ Suspension with probation may be pronounced under the same conditions as
simple suspension when the sentence is equal to or greater than six months' imprisonment.
Suspension with probation may also be pronounced with regard to persons
previously convicted to an imprisonment sentence with simple suspension or to a
firm imprisonment sentence of less than six months.
The probation period may not be less than three years nor more than five years.
Subject to the provisions of paragraphs 1 and 2 of this article, Article 42 above is
applicable to suspension with probation.

Art.44

‐ The probation regime comprises general obligations and, where applicable,
special obligations, of supervision and assistance.
The observance by the convicted person of the obligations attached to probation is monitored by a magistrate
designated for this purpose within the court and who is assisted by probation delegates who are volunteers
or remunerated.
The designation of the probation delegate is made by the magistrate in charge of monitoring, who may
modify it.
The magistrate of the place of residence of the convicted person, in charge of monitoring, may at any time and by
reasoned decision, suspend all or part of the special obligations or modify them without
however being able to aggravate them.

Art.45

‐ The following general obligations are imposed by operation of law on the convicted person placed
under the probation regime:
• a) respond to summonses from the judge in charge of monitoring the application of measures
taken or from the probation delegate;
• b) receive visits from the probation delegate and communicate to him information or
documents of a nature to allow monitoring of his means of existence;
• c) notify or justify to the judge in charge of monitoring the application of measures
taken or to the probation delegate the reasons for his changes of employment or residence;
• d) notify the probation delegate of any absence exceeding fifteen days and inform him of his
return;
14

• e) obtain prior authorization from the judge in charge of monitoring the application of measures
taken before any travel exceeding fifteen days or those planned abroad.

Art.46

‐ In addition to the general obligations imposed by the preceding article, the judgment or decision may
impose on the convicted person on probation the observance of all or part of the following
special obligations:
• a) establish his or her residence in one or more specified places;
• b) not appear in certain specified places, except with special and temporary authorization;
• c) engage in a professional activity, attend education or receive professional
training;
• d) submit to control, treatment or care measures, even under the regime of
hospitalization, particularly for the purposes of detoxification;
• e) contribute to family expenses or regularly pay maintenance allowances;
• f) repair the damage caused by the offense;
• g) not drive certain vehicles determined by the categories of licenses in force;
• h) not frequent certain places such as drinking establishments, racetracks, gaming houses
;
• i) not place any bets;
• j) abstain from any excess of alcoholic beverages;
• k) not associate with certain convicted persons, particularly co-authors or accomplices of the offense
;
• l) abstain from receiving or accommodating at his or her home certain persons.

Art.47.‐ The probation officer is responsible for the following duties

• a) ensure that the convicted person complies with the general and special obligations to which he
or she is subject;
• b) encourage and assist the convicted person's efforts towards his or her social rehabilitation,
particularly with regard to his or her family and professional reintegration;
• c) provide the convicted person with all moral assistance and, in the event that he or she needs
material assistance, refer the matter to the designated magistrate so that aid may be provided by any
welfare or social assistance organization;
• d) keep the designated magistrate regularly informed of the exercise of his or her mission and refer
to him or her in case of difficulties.

Art.48

‐ In the event that during the probation period the convicted person does not comply with one of the general
or special obligations to which he or she is subject, the court that pronounced the conviction may
order the execution of the suspended sentence.
This execution does not entail the revocation of a simple suspension previously granted.
If the suspension with probation has not been revoked pursuant to this article or to article
42 paragraph 3, the sentence is deemed null and void.
15

Section 3

‐ Suspension with the obligation to perform community service work

Art.49

‐ The court may, under the conditions and according to the procedures provided for in articles 42
and 43 above, provide that the person sentenced to a term of imprisonment with suspension shall perform,
during working days, for a duration ranging from 120 hours, or fifteen days, to 240 hours,
or thirty days, community service work for the benefit of a legal person under public law or
an association authorized to implement community service work.
Suspension with the obligation to perform community service work may not be ordered
when the accused suffers from an obvious physical or mental incapacity to perform such
a measure, refuses it or is not present at the hearing.
The right to refuse is recalled to the person concerned, after the declaration of guilt.
The answer to the question asked pursuant to the paragraph above is recorded in the hearing
minutes.
The procedures for implementing the obligation to perform community service work are governed by
the provisions of article 26 of this Code.

Art.50

‐ During the period fixed by the court to perform community service work, the
convicted person must, in addition to the obligation to perform the prescribed work, satisfy the following control
measures:
• a) respond to summonses from the judge responsible for monitoring the implementation of the measures
taken or from the social worker designated for this purpose;
• b) submit to the medical examination prior to the execution of the sentence whose purpose is to
determine whether he or she is not suffering from a condition dangerous to other workers and to
ensure that he or she is medically fit for the work to which it is envisaged to assign him or her;
• c) justify the reasons for his or her changes of employment or residence that prevent
the execution of the community service work according to the established procedures;
• d) obtain prior authorization from the judge responsible for monitoring obligations for any
travel that would prevent the execution of the community service work according to the established
procedures;
• e) receive visits from the social worker designated to monitor the execution of the sentence;
• f) satisfy the particular obligations that the court has specifically imposed on him or her.

Art.51

‐ Suspension with the obligation to perform community service work is subject to the
same rules as those provided for suspension with probation.
16

Section 4 ‐ Semi-liberty

Art.52

‐ When the trial court pronounces a sentence equal to or less than one year
of imprisonment, it may decide with regard to the convicted person who demonstrates either the exercise
of a professional activity, or his or her attendance at education or professional training
or a traineeship or temporary employment with a view to his or her social integration,
or his or her essential participation in the life of his or her family, or the need to undergo
medical treatment, that the sentence of imprisonment shall be executed under the regime of semi-liberty.

Art.53

‐ The convicted person admitted to the benefit of semi-liberty is required to return to
the penitentiary establishment according to the procedures determined by the President of the High Court
of the place of execution of the sentence, based on the time necessary for the activity,
education, professional training, traineeship, participation in family life or
treatment for which he or she was admitted to the regime of semi-liberty.

Art.54

‐ The convicted person admitted to the benefit of semi-liberty is required to remain in
the penitentiary establishment where he or she is serving his or her sentence during the days when, for whatever
reason, his or her external obligations are interrupted.
In case of non-compliance with the procedures according to which he or she is required to return to the
penitentiary establishment, the convicted person is incarcerated until the end of his or her sentence by decision of the Public
Prosecutor.

Section 5 ‐ Division of the correctional sentence of imprisonment

Art.55

‐ In case of conviction for an offense to a firm sentence of imprisonment equal to or
less than one year, the court may, for serious medical, family, professional
or social reasons, decide that the imprisonment shall be, during a period not exceeding three years,
executed in fractions, none of which may be less than three months.
The duration of the fractions is determined by order of the President of the High Court
of the place of execution of the sentence, after hearing the Public Prosecutor.

Section 6 ‐ Pardon and the effect of death

Art.56

‐ Pardon is the commutation or partial or total remission, conditional or not, of
sentences, security measures and probation obligations.

Art.57

‐ The death of the convicted person does not prevent the execution on his or her property of pecuniary
convictions nor the closure of the establishment, nor confiscation.
17

Title 3 ‐ Criminal Liability of Natural Persons

Chapter 1 ‐ General Provisions

Art.58

‐ A penalty may only be pronounced against a criminally liable person.
Any person who commits acts characterizing the constituent elements of an offence with the intention that such acts result in the commission of the offence is criminally liable.
Except where the law provides otherwise, a failure to act does not give rise to criminal liability.
Except where the law provides otherwise, criminal liability can only exist if the conditions of paragraph 2 above are met.
However, in matters of contraventions, criminal liability exists even if the act or omission is not intentional or if the consequence was not intended.

Art.59

‐ Ignorance of the law and the motive invoked by the accused or the defendant do not affect criminal liability.

Art.60

‐ An act ordered or authorized by law and carried out in accordance with the law does not constitute an offence.

Chapter 2 ‐ Causes that Eliminate or Mitigate the Criminal Liability of Natural Persons

Art.61

‐ A person who acted under the influence of a force or constraint which he or she could not resist is not criminally liable.

Art.62

‐ Criminal liability cannot result from the act of a person who was suffering, at the time of the acts, from a psychic or neuropsychic disorder that totally abolished his or her discernment or control of his or her acts.
In the event that the psychic or neuropsychic disorder did not totally abolish the discernment or control of the person's acts, it constitutes a mitigating excuse of liability.

Art.63.‐ Involuntary intoxication is treated as mental illness

Art.6.4.‐ A minor under thirteen years of age is not criminally liable

18

A minor from thirteen to fifteen years of age, if declared criminally liable, may only be subject to one of the special measures provided for by law, including:
• a) the attribution of his or her custody to his or her parents, guardian, custodian or any other trustworthy person;
• b) supervised liberty as organized by the rules of criminal procedure;
• c) placement in a vocational training or care institution;
• d) placement in a specialized institution.
A minor over fifteen years of age and under eighteen years of age declared criminally liable benefits from the mitigating excuse of liability.
The age to be taken into consideration is that which the perpetrator of the acts had on the date of their commission.

Art.65

‐ Criminal liability cannot result from the act of an individual subjected to an imminent threat, not otherwise avoidable, of death or serious injury as provided for in this Code.
However, if the act is an offence punishable by life imprisonment or if it resulted in the death or the aforementioned injuries, the perpetrator only benefits from the mitigating excuse.
This article is not applicable to anyone who voluntarily exposed himself or herself to the risk of such threats.

Art.66.‐ The mitigating excuse is applicable

• a) to a minor under eighteen years of age having acted under the constraint of his or her parents, persons having custody or customary responsibility for him or her;
• b) to employees, staff, civil servants having acted under the constraint of their hierarchical superiors.

Art.67

‐ Criminal liability cannot result from an act ordered by legitimate authority, unless the order is manifestly illegal.

Art.68

‐ Criminal liability cannot result from an act ordered by the immediate necessity of protecting one's life or physical integrity or that of another against an unlawful attack, provided that the defense is proportionate to the seriousness of the attack.
There is always just proportion between homicide and the unlawful attack that gives reason to fear death, rape or serious injury as provided for in this Code.

Art.69

‐ Benefits from the mitigating excuse, if there is no disproportion between the provocation and the reaction, any perpetrator of an offence immediately provoked by the unlawful act of another against himself or herself or, in his or her presence, against his or her spouse, descendant or ascendant, his or her brother or sister, his or her employer or employee, the minor or incapacitated person in his or her custody.
19

Homicide as well as injuries are also excusable if they were:
• a) provoked by serious blows or violence against persons;
• b) committed by one of the spouses on his or her spouse or on his or her accomplice caught in flagrante delicto of adultery.

Art.70

‐ Independently of the legitimate defense provided for in Article 68 of this Code, criminal liability cannot result from harm done to property for the purpose of averting from oneself or another or from property belonging to oneself or another, a serious, imminent and not otherwise avoidable danger, provided that there is no disproportion between the harm to be averted and the measure taken to prevent it.

Art.71

‐ When the law provides for a mitigating excuse, penalties are reduced as follows:
• a) if life imprisonment is incurred, the penalty is reduced to a custodial sentence of two to ten years;
• b) in the case of a crime not punishable by life imprisonment, the penalty is reduced to a custodial sentence of one to five years;
• c) in the case of a misdemeanor, the maximum custodial sentences and fines are reduced by half, and the minimum is that of Article 76 paragraph 1 of this Code.
In the case of a combination of mitigating excuses and mitigating circumstances, the minimum penalty is that provided for by Article 76 paragraph 1 of this Code.

Chapter 3

‐ Causes that Aggravate the Criminal Liability of Natural Persons
Recidivism

Art.72.‐ Is a recidivist

• a) anyone who, after having been convicted of a crime or misdemeanor of the same nature, commits a new offence classified as a crime or misdemeanor within a period that begins to run from the date of the final conviction and that expires five years after the execution of the sentence pronounced or its prescription;
• b) anyone who, after having been convicted of a contravention, commits a new contravention within a period that begins to run from the date of the final conviction and that expires twelve months after the execution of the sentence pronounced or its prescription.
In the case of recidivism, the maximum fixed-term sentence and that of the fine provided for is doubled.
The status of civil servant

Art.73

‐ The status of civil servant, public officer or agent responsible for a public service is an aggravating circumstance of criminal liability against those among
20

them who, apart from cases where the law specifically regulates the penalties incurred for crimes and misdemeanors committed by them, have been found guilty of other crimes or misdemeanors that they were responsible for preventing or suppressing.
In the case of commission of an offence in the circumstances indicated in paragraph 1 above, the maximum penalty incurred is doubled.

Chapter 4 ‐ Mitigating Circumstances and Choice of Penalty

Art.74

‐ Mitigating circumstances may be admitted, by reasoned decision, in favor of a convicted person, except in matters where the law formally excludes them.

Art.75

‐ The penalties provided by law against the accused person or persons found guilty
of a crime, and in whose favour mitigating circumstances have been retained, may be reduced to
ten years or five years of imprisonment if the crime is punishable by life imprisonment, to three years
of deprivation of liberty if the crime is punishable by a sentence of at least fifteen years of imprisonment and to one year of deprivation of liberty in other cases.
If, in application of the provisions of paragraph 1 above, a sentence equal to or less than ten years of
deprivation of liberty is pronounced, the court may impose on the convicted person a fine which
cannot exceed 2,000,000 FCFA.

Art.76

‐ When mitigating circumstances are retained in the case of an offence or a
contravention, the court may reduce the custodial sentence incurred to the statutory
minimum. The same applies concerning the fine.
When the law provides only a custodial sentence, the court may substitute a
fine the maximum of which is 1,000,000 FCFA in the case of an offence and 25,000 FCFA in the case of a
contravention.

Art.77

‐ The penalty or measure pronounced within the limits fixed or authorised by law is
a function of the circumstances of the offence, the danger it presents to public order, the
personality of the convicted person and his possibilities of rehabilitation as well as the practical
possibilities of execution.

Chapitre 5 ‐ De la tentative

Art.78

‐ Constitutes an attempt and is considered as the crime or offence itself, any act
tending to the execution of a crime or an offence and demonstrating without ambiguity the
irrevocable intention of its perpetrator to commit the offence, if it has not been voluntarily suspended
or if it has failed in its effect only by circumstances independent of the will of its
perpetrator.
21

An attempt is punishable even though the desired objective could not be achieved by reason of a
circumstance of fact unknown to the perpetrator.
The preparatory act, by itself, does not constitute an attempt in the criminal sense of the term.

Chapitre 6 ‐ De la coaction et de la complicité

Art.79

‐ Is a co-author whoever participates with another and in agreement with him in the commission
of an offence.

Art.80.‐ Shall be punished as accomplices to an action qualified as a crime or offence

• a) those who by gifts, promises, threats, abuse of authority or power, machination or
culpable artifice, have provoked this action or given instructions to
commit it;
• b) those who have procured weapons, instruments or any other means which have served the
action, knowing that they were to serve it;
• c) those who have, with knowledge, aided or assisted the perpetrator or perpetrators of
the offence in the acts which have prepared or facilitated it or in those which have
consummated it;
• d) those who, knowing the criminal conduct of wrongdoers exercising brigandage
or violence against the security of the State, public peace, persons or
property, habitually provide them with lodging, place of retreat or meeting or
information useful to their activity;
• e) those who, having knowledge of an attempted or consummated crime or offence, have not informed
the administrative or judicial authorities, when it was still possible to prevent or
limit its effects, or further, to prevent the guilty parties from committing new
crimes or offences;
• f) those who being able to prevent by their immediate action, without risk to themselves or to
third parties, an act qualified as a crime or offence against the bodily integrity of the person,
voluntarily refrain from doing so.
The accomplices to a crime or an offence shall be punished as the perpetrators themselves of that crime or
that offence, except in cases where the law provides otherwise.
Whoever has provoked a crime or an offence shall be punished by the penalties provided for
the offence even though it has not been committed due to the voluntary abstention
of the person or persons who were to commit it or a circumstance or quality personal to them.
22

Titre 4 ‐ De la responsabilité pénale des personnes morales

Chapitre 1 ‐ Des dispositions générales

Art.81

‐ Legal persons, with the exclusion of the State and its subdivisions, are
criminally liable for offences committed by their organs or representatives, when
they have acted in the exercise of or on the occasion of their functions.

Art.82

‐ The criminal liability of legal persons does not exclude that of natural
persons who are perpetrators or accomplices of the same acts.

Art.83

‐ The conditions of criminal liability of legal persons are, apart from
those defined in article 81 above, provided by the incrimination provisions of this
Code.

Chapitre 2

‐ Des causes qui aggravent la responsabilité pénale des personnes morales

Art.84

‐ The provisions on recidivism provided in article 72 of this Code are
applicable to legal persons.

Chapitre 3 ‐ Du choix de la peine pour les personnes morales

Art.85

‐ The penalty or measure pronounced within the limits fixed or authorised by law is
a function of the circumstances of the offence, the danger that it presents to public order,
the financial capacities of the legal person and, more broadly, the practical
possibilities of execution.
23

Livre 2 ‐ Des crimes et délits contre la Nation, l'Etat et la paix publique

Titre 1 ‐ Des atteintes à l'intégrité de l'Etat

Chapitre 1 ‐ De la Trahison et de l'espionnage

Section 1 ‐ De la Trahison

Art.86

‐ Is guilty of the crime of treason and punished by the penalty of life imprisonment any
Chadian, any soldier in the service of Chad, who:
• a) bears arms against Chad;
• b) maintains intelligence with a foreign power, with a view to engaging it to
undertake hostilities against Chad, or provides it with the means, either by facilitating
the penetration of foreign forces on the territory, or by undermining the loyalty of the armies,
or in any other manner;
• c) delivers to a foreign power or its agents, either troops, or towns, places,
works, posts, stores, arsenals, materiel, munitions, vessels or navigation apparatus, belonging to Chad or assigned to its defence;
• d) with a view to harming national defence, destroys or damages a vessel, a navigation apparatus, materiel, a construction or any installation, or who, for the same
purpose, introduces, either before or after their completion, defects likely to
damage them or cause an accident;
• e) provokes soldiers to enter the service of a foreign power, facilitates the
means for them or makes enlistments for a power at war with Chad;
• f) maintains intelligence with a foreign power or with its agents with a view to
favouring the enterprises of that power against Chad;
• g) obstructs the circulation of military materiel;
• h) participates in an enterprise of demoralisation of the army or the nation having as its object to
harm national defence.

Art.87

‐ Is also guilty of the crime of treason and punished by the penalty of life
imprisonment any Chadian who:
• a) delivers to a foreign power or agents, in whatever form and by whatever
means, information, an object, document or process which must be kept secret in the interest of national defence;
• b) secures, by whatever means, possession of such information, object,
document or process with a view to delivering it to a foreign power or its agents;
• c) destroys or allows to be destroyed such information, object, document or process with a view to favouring
a foreign power.
24

Section 2 ‐ Espionage

Art.88

‐ Any foreigner who commits any of the acts referred to in Article 86 b, c, d, f, g and h and in Article 87 above is guilty of the crime of espionage and punished by life imprisonment.

Chapitre 2

‐ Offences against national defence not classified as treason or espionage

Section 1 ‐ Offences against national defence

Art.89

‐ Any person who, with the intention of delivering them to a foreign power, gathers information, objects, documents or processes whose collection and exploitation are likely to harm national defence is guilty of the crime of offence against national defence and punished by life imprisonment.

Art.90

‐ Any keeper, any custodian by function or by capacity of information, an object, document or process which must be kept secret in the interest of national defence or whose knowledge could lead to the discovery of a national defence secret, who without intention of treason or espionage:
• a) destroys it, removes it, allows it to be destroyed or removed, reproduces it or allows it to be reproduced;
• b) brings it or allows it to be brought to the knowledge of an unqualified person or the public.
The penalty is imprisonment of five to ten years if the keeper or custodian acted through clumsiness, imprudence, inattention, negligence or failure to observe regulations.

Section 2 ‐ Other offences against national defence

Art.91

‐ Any person who, outside the cases referred to in Article 90 above, without intention of treason or espionage:
• a) secures, being without capacity, possession of information, an object, document or process which must be kept secret in the interest of national defence or whose knowledge could lead to the discovery of a national defence secret;
• b) destroys, removes, allows to be destroyed or reproduces or allows to be reproduced such information, object, document or process;
• c) brings or allows to be brought to the knowledge of an unqualified person or the public such information, object, document or process, or extends its disclosure.
25

Art.92

‐ Any person who, without prior authorization from the competent authority, delivers or communicates to a person acting on behalf of a foreign power or enterprise, either an invention concerning national defence, or information, studies or manufacturing processes relating to an invention of this kind or to an industrial application concerning national defence is guilty of offence against national defence and punished by imprisonment of twenty to thirty years.
Any person who possesses, carries, manufactures, imports firearms and/or opens an arms depot without prior legal authorization is also guilty of offence against national defence and punished by the penalties provided for in the preceding article.

Art.93

‐ Any person who, without intention of treason or espionage, brings to the knowledge of an unqualified person or the public military information not made public by the competent authority and whose disclosure is manifestly likely to harm national defence is guilty of offence against national defence and punished by imprisonment of one to five years.
Private individuals who possess military vehicles are punished by the same penalties.
The complementary penalties provided for in Article 28 of this Code are also applicable.
The provisions of this Code and the Code of Criminal Procedure relating to suspended sentences and conditional release are not applicable to the perpetrators of the acts referred to above.

Section 3 ‐ Irregular presence in certain places

Art.94.‐ Any person is punished by imprisonment of three to eight years who

• a) enters under a disguise or a false name or by concealing their capacity or nationality, into a fortified place, a work, post or arsenal, into the works, camps, bivouacs or cantonments of an army, into a vessel or craft of war or commercial navigation employed for national defence, into an armed military vehicle, into an establishment or site concerning national defence;
• b) even without disguising themselves, or without concealing their name, capacity or nationality, organizes in a covert manner any means of correspondence or remote transmission likely to harm national defence;
• c) flies over Chadian territory by means of a foreign aircraft without being authorized to do so by a diplomatic convention or permission from the Chadian authority;
• d) in a prohibited zone fixed by the military authority, executes, without authorization from the latter, drawings, photographs, surveys or photographic operations inside or around fortified places, works, posts or military establishments or establishments concerning national defence;
• e) stays, in defiance of a prohibition enacted by decree, within a determined radius around fortified works or military establishments;
26

• f) communicates to an unqualified person or makes public information relating either to measures taken to discover and arrest the perpetrators and accomplices of crimes or offences defined in sections 1 and 2 of this chapter, or to the progress of prosecutions and investigation, or to debates before trial courts.
In peacetime, the perpetrators of the offences provided for in paragraphs c, d, e and f of paragraph 1 above are punished by imprisonment of one to five years.

Section 4 ‐ Intelligence with the enemy

Art.95.‐ Any person is punished by imprisonment of one to five years who

• a) by hostile acts not approved by the Government, exposes Chad to a declaration of war;
• b) by acts not approved by the Government, exposes Chadians to reprisals;
• c) maintains with the agents of a foreign power intelligence likely to harm the military or diplomatic situation of Chad or its economic interests.

Art.96

‐ Any person is punished by imprisonment of two to six years who, in time of war:
• a) maintains, without authorization from the Government, correspondence or relations with subjects or agents of an enemy power;
• b) conducts, directly or through an intermediary, acts of commerce with the agents of an enemy power, in defiance of enacted prohibitions.

Art.97

‐ Any person who, in peacetime, with a view to harming national defence, obstructs the circulation of military equipment or, by any means whatsoever, provokes, facilitates or organizes a violent or concerted action having as its purpose or result such obstruction is punished by imprisonment of one to five years.

Section 5 ‐ Other actions harmful to national defence

Art.98

‐ Any person who, in peacetime, knowingly participates in an enterprise of demoralization of the army having as its object to harm national defence is punished by imprisonment of one to five years.

Art.99

‐ Any person who, in peacetime, enlists soldiers in Chadian territory on behalf of a foreign power is punished by imprisonment of one to five years.

Art.100

‐ In all cases provided for in this section, the guilty parties may, in addition, be sentenced to a fine of 100,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA.
27

Chapitre 3

‐ Attacks, conspiracies and other offences against the constitutional order, the integrity and security of the national territory

Section 1 ‐ Offences against the constitutional order

Art.101

‐ Anyone who commits an act constituting an attack the purpose of which is either to destroy or change the constitutional regime, or to incite citizens or inhabitants to arm themselves against the authority of the State or against one another, or to undermine the integrity of the national territory, shall be punished by imprisonment of twenty to thirty years.

Art.102

‐ A conspiracy is constituted by a concerted and settled resolution between two or more persons to commit one of the acts constituting a crime mentioned in the preceding article.
Conspiracy is punishable by a term of imprisonment of eight to fifteen years.

Art.103

‐ Anyone who, outside the cases provided for in articles 101 and 102 above, undertakes, by any means whatsoever, to undermine the integrity of the national territory, shall be punished by imprisonment of twenty to thirty years.

Art.104

‐ In all cases provided for in articles 101 to 103 above, the confiscation provided for in article 28 of this Code shall be ordered.

Section 2 ‐ Organizations against the constitutional order

Art.105.‐ The following shall be punished by life imprisonment

• a) those who shall have raised or caused to be raised armed troops, engaged or enlisted, caused to be engaged or enlisted soldiers or shall have supplied them with arms or ammunition, without order or authorization of the legitimate authority;
• b) those who, without right or legitimate reason, shall have taken any military command whatsoever, those who, against the order of the Government, shall have retained such a command and commanders who shall have kept their army or their troop assembled after disbandment or separation shall have been ordered.

Art.106

‐ Any person who, having the power to dispose of the public force, shall have requisitioned or ordered, caused to be requisitioned or ordered its action or use to prevent the execution of laws on military recruitment or on mobilization, shall be punished by imprisonment of twenty to thirty years.
28

Section 3 ‐ Offences against the institutions of the State

Art.107

‐ An attack the purpose of which is to disturb the public peace by the massacre or devastation of any part whatsoever of the territory shall be liable to life imprisonment.
In the case provided for in this article, the confiscation provided for in article 28 of this Code shall be mandatorily ordered.

Art.108

‐ Anyone who attacks the life of the Head of State, a member of the Government or a member of the National Assembly shall be punished by life imprisonment.

Section 4 ‐ Armed bands

Art.109

‐ Anyone who, with a view to disturbing the State by one of the crimes provided for in articles 102 and 108 above or for any other cause or while making attack or resistance against the public force acting against the perpetrators of these crimes, places himself at the head of armed bands or exercises therein any function or command whatsoever, shall be punished by life imprisonment.
Anyone who directs the association, raises or causes to be raised, organizes or causes to be organized bands or knowingly and voluntarily supplies or procures for them subsidies, arms, ammunition and instruments of crime or sends supplies or, in any other manner, practices intelligence with the leaders or commanders of the bands, shall be punished by life imprisonment.
In the case provided for in this article, the confiscation provided for in article 28 of this Code shall be ordered.

Art.110

‐ Individuals forming part of bands, without exercising any command or employment therein, shall be punished by imprisonment of five to ten years.

Art.111

‐ In cases where the crimes referred to in this section do not provide for confiscation, a fine of 50,000 to 5,000,000 FCFA may be ordered.

Chapter 4 ‐ Other offences against the State

Section 1 ‐ Insurrectional movements

Art.112

‐ Anyone who participates in an insurrectional movement shall be punished by imprisonment of five to ten years.
29

Participation in an armed insurrection and the actual use of arms shall be punished by life imprisonment.

Art.113

‐ Those who direct or organize an insurrectional movement or who, knowingly and voluntarily, supply or procure for it arms, ammunition and instruments of crime or supplies or who, in any manner whatsoever, practice intelligence with the leaders or commanders of this movement, shall be punished by life imprisonment.

Art.114

‐ In the cases provided for in articles 110 and 111 above, a fine of 50,000 to 5,000,000 FCFA may be ordered in addition to the penalties indicated in the said articles.

Section 2 ‐ Mercenarism

Art.115.‐ A mercenary is considered to be any person who

• a) is specially recruited in the country or abroad to fight in an armed conflict;
• b) in fact takes a direct part in hostilities;
• c) takes part in hostilities with a view to obtaining personal advantage and to whom is effectively promised by a party to the conflict or on its behalf, material remuneration;
• d) is neither a national of a party to the conflict, nor a resident of the territory controlled by a party to the conflict;
• e) is not a member of the armed forces of a party to the conflict;
• f) has not been sent by a State other than a party to the conflict on official mission as a member of the armed forces of the said State.
An individual, a group or an association, a representative of the State who, with the purpose of opposing armed violence to the stability or territorial integrity of Chad, practices one of the following acts, commits the crime of mercenarism:
• a) sheltering, organizing, financing, assisting, equipping, training, promoting, supporting or employing in any manner whatsoever, bands of mercenaries;
• b) enlisting, engaging or attempting to engage in the said bands;
• c) allowing that in the territories subject to its sovereignty or in any other place under its control, the activities mentioned in point (a) above develop or granting facilities of transit, transport or any other operation of the aforementioned bands.
Any natural person who commits the crime of mercenarism as defined in paragraph 1 above shall be sentenced to imprisonment of twenty to thirty years.
Any person who assumes command of mercenaries or gives them orders shall be considered as an author of mercenarism and punished by the same penalty.
Mercenaries do not have combatant status and may not benefit from prisoner of war status.
30

Art.116

‐ A mercenary shall answer both for the crime of mercenarism and for all related offences, without prejudice to all other offences for which he could be prosecuted.

Art.117

‐ Legal persons may be declared criminally liable for acts of mercenarism under the conditions defined by articles 81 to 85 of this Code.
The penalty incurred by these legal persons is a fine of 50,000,000 to 500,000,000 FCFA.
In addition to the penalty provided for in paragraph 2 above, legal persons incur the accessory penalties of article 28 of this Code as well as the confiscation of all or part of their property, whatever its nature, movable or immovable, divided or undivided.

Chapter 5 ‐ Miscellaneous provisions

Art.118

‐ Subject to obligations arising from professional secrecy, any person who, having knowledge of
plans or acts of treason, espionage or other activities likely to harm national defence,
fails to report them to the military, administrative or judicial authorities from the
moment they became aware of them, shall be punished in time of war by imprisonment of two to ten years.
The acts provided for in paragraph 1 of this article are, in case of commission in time of peace, punished
by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 50,000 to
500,000 FCFA or by only one of these two penalties.
For the purposes of applying this article, the following are assimilated to accomplices and punished
as such, those who:
• a) provide, without constraint and with knowledge of their intentions, subsidies, means
of subsistence, place of retreat or meeting to the perpetrators of offences against the integrity of the State;
• b) knowingly carry the correspondence of the perpetrators of such crimes or such offences, or
knowingly facilitate them, in any manner whatsoever, in the search for, concealment, transport, or
transmission of the object of the crime or offence.
For the purposes of applying this article, the following are assimilated to receivers and punished as
such, those who:
• a) knowingly conceal objects or instruments having served or intended to serve to commit the
crime or offence or the objects, materials or documents obtained by the crimes or offences;
• b) knowingly destroy, remove, conceal, hide or alter
public or private documents likely to facilitate the investigation of the crime or offence, the discovery of
evidence or the punishment of its perpetrators.
31

Art.119

‐ Any person who, before any execution or attempt of a crime
or an offence against the security of the State, gives first knowledge of it to the
administrative or judicial authorities is exempt from the penalty incurred.
The penalty is reduced by application of the rule of mitigating excuse, if the denunciation occurs
after the consummation of the attempt of the crime or offence, but before the opening of
proceedings.
The penalty is reduced by application of the rule of mitigating excuse with regard to the offender
who, after the opening of proceedings, procures the arrest of the perpetrators or accomplices of the
same offence or of other offences of the same nature or equal gravity.
Except for particular crimes which they have personally committed, no penalty is pronounced
against those who, having been part of an armed gang without exercising any
command and without fulfilling any employment or function, withdrew at the first
warning from the civil or military authorities or surrendered to these authorities.
Those who are exempt from penalty by application of this article may nevertheless be
prohibited from residence and sentenced to the prohibition of certain rights, as provided in article 36 of
this Code.

Art.120

‐ The financial remuneration received by the offender, or the amount thereof when the
remuneration could not be seized by the investigators, is declared acquired by the treasury by the judgment
pronouncing the conviction of that person.

Art.121

‐ For the purposes of applying this chapter, the following are assimilated to weapons:
• a) all machines, all instruments or utensils that are cutting, piercing or blunt;
• b) pocket knives, simple canes and all other objects whatsoever if they have been used
to kill, wound or strike.

Art.122

‐ The President of the Republic may, by ordinance taken after legislative authorization,
extend either for time of war or for time of peace, all or part of the provisions
relating to offences against the integrity of the State, to acts concerning it and which would be committed
against powers allied or friendly to Chad.
32

Title 2

‐ Offences against the authority of the State and disturbances caused to the exercise of this
authority

Chapter 1 ‐ Unlawful assemblies Section 1 ‐

Participation in unlawful assemblies

Art.123.‐ The following are prohibited on the public highway or in a public place

• a) any armed assembly;
• b) any unarmed assembly which could disturb public order.
An assembly is said to be armed when individuals composing it are carrying
apparent or concealed weapons or any objects whatsoever, apparent or not, having served as weapons or brought
with a view to serving as weapons.

Art.124

‐ Any unarmed person
who, being part of an armed assembly, does not abandon it after the first
summons shall be punished by imprisonment of two months to one year.
The imprisonment is six months to two years if the unarmed person remains in an
armed assembly and if it disperses only before the use of force.

Art.125

‐ Any person who in an assembly, during a demonstration or on the occasion of a demonstration, during a
meeting or on the occasion of a meeting, has been found carrying an apparent or concealed weapon or
any apparent or concealed objects whatsoever, having served as weapons or brought with a view to serving
as weapons, shall be punished by imprisonment of three months to two years.
The imprisonment shall be one year to five years in the case of an assembly dispersed by force.
The penalties provided for in paragraph 2 shall be doubled in case of resistance.

Art.126

‐ Any direct provocation to an armed assembly shall be punished by imprisonment of
one to five years if it has been followed by effect and, otherwise, by imprisonment of three months to
one year.
Any direct provocation to an unarmed assembly shall be punished by three months to one year
of imprisonment if it has disturbed public order and, otherwise, by
imprisonment of one to six months.
33

Section 2 ‐ Damage caused by an unlawful assembly

Art.127

‐ Any person who continues to be part of an assembly after the third
summons made by a representative of the public authority may be sentenced to
pecuniary reparation for damage caused by that assembly.

Art.128

‐ Persons convicted of participation in an assembly or provocation to an
assembly shall be jointly and severally liable for reparation of damage caused by that
assembly.
The complementary penalties of article 28 of this Code may in addition be applied.

Chapter 2

‐ Rebellion and other acts of resistance to the action of
administrative and judicial authorities

Section 1 ‐ Rebellion

Art.129

‐ Any attack, any resistance, with violence and assault, against ministerial officers, the public force, agents responsible for the collection of taxes and contributions,
customs agents, officers or agents of the administrative or judicial police, acting
for the execution of laws, orders or ordinances of the public authority, warrants of
justice or judgments, is qualified, according to the circumstances, as crime or offence of rebellion.

Art.130

‐ If the rebellion was committed without weapons or by one or two armed persons at most, the
offenders shall be punished by imprisonment of three months to two years.
If the rebellion was committed by more than two armed persons, the offenders shall be punished by
imprisonment of one to four years.
In either case, a fine of 5,000 to 500,000 FCFA may be pronounced.

Art.131

‐ In case of rebellion with gang or assembly, the penalties provided for in paragraph I of the
preceding article shall be applicable to rebels without functions or employment in the gang, who withdrew at the first warning from the public authority, or even since, if they were seized only
outside the place of rebellion and without new resistance and without weapons.

Art.132

‐ The prohibition of rights provided for in Article 28 of this Code may also be
pronounced in the case of the two preceding articles.

Art.133

‐ Any gathering of individuals for a crime or offence is deemed armed in the cases referred to in
Article 130 paragraphs 1 and 2 above.
34

Art.134

‐ Shall be punished as gatherings of rebels those which have been formed with or without
arms and accompanied by violence or threats against the administrative authority, the
officers and agents of police or against the public force by prisoners under investigation, accused,
convicted or restrained by body.

Art.135

‐ The penalty applied for rebellion by prisoners under investigation, accused or
convicted in relation to other crimes or offences, shall be served by them in the following manner:
• a) by those who, by reason of the crimes or offences which caused their detention, are or would be
sentenced to a non-perpetual penalty, immediately after the expiration of that penalty;
• b) by the others, immediately after the final judgment or decision which acquitted them or dismissed them from the charge for which they were detained;
• c) by those restrained by body, after the expiration of the restraint.

Section 2 ‐ Resistance to the action of authorities

Art.136.‐ Shall be punished by three months to two years' imprisonment anyone who has

voluntarily abstained for two years from paying taxes, contributions or duties
legally owed.
Public prosecution may only be initiated after formal notice given, either by
registered letter with acknowledgment of receipt, or by official report of a sworn enforcement agent, or by writ of the enforcement agent, or at the request of the public prosecutor's office, by a judicial police officer.

Art.137

‐ Those who have incited refusal to pay taxes, contributions and duties shall be punished
by imprisonment of six months to five years.

Art.138

‐ Those who have knowingly helped a person whom they knew to be suspected of a crime
or offence and to be sought for that reason, by the justice system, to evade or attempt to evade
searches shall be punished by one month to two years' imprisonment and a fine of 50,000 to
500,000 FCFA.
These provisions shall not be applicable to the spouse, ascendants and descendants nor to relatives
and in-laws up to the degree of uncle and nephew.

Art.139

‐ Shall be punished by fifteen days to three months' imprisonment and a fine of 25,000 to
50,000 FCFA those who, without lawful excuse, have abstained from responding to regular
summonses addressed by the administrative or judicial authorities, for matters within their
competence, in the cases and forms provided by law or regulation.

Art.140

‐ Those who, outside the cases of rebellion and the cases provided for in the preceding articles, have
opposed, by any means whatsoever, the exercise of acts of their function by the
officials or agents holding public authority, the agents of the public
force or the citizens charged with a ministry of public service and have thus caused harm or
attempted to cause harm to public order shall be punished by fifteen days to three months'
imprisonment and a fine of 25,000 to 50,000 FCFA.

Art.141

‐ Those who, without the prior authorization of the public officer, in the case where it is
prescribed, have had a deceased individual buried, shall be punished by six days to six months'
imprisonment, and a fine of 25,000 to 500,000 FCFA, without prejudice to the prosecution
for crimes of which the perpetrators of this offence could be suspected in this circumstance.
The same penalty shall be applied against those who have contravened, in any manner whatsoever,
the law and regulations relating to the aforementioned burials.

Chapitre 3

‐ Insults and violence towards constituted bodies, high authorities,
magistrates

Section 1 ‐ Insults to constituted bodies

Art.142

‐ Without prejudice to the penalties provided by special legislation for offences committed
by way of the press and similar offences, the insult to a member of the Government or of
the National Assembly or to a magistrate, in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of their
functions, committed by words, writings or drawings, by gestures or by the sending of any objects whatsoever, shall
be punished by fifteen days to two years' imprisonment and a fine of 25,000 to 100,000 FCFA.

Art.143

‐ When the insult has been committed against a head of administrative district, a ministerial
officer, an agent of the public force, or a citizen charged with a ministry of public
service, the penalty shall be fifteen days to three years' imprisonment and a fine of 5,000 to 250,000 FCFA.

Art.144

‐ Whoever has publicly, by acts, by words or writings, sought to bring discredit
upon a jurisdictional act or decision, in conditions likely to undermine
the authority of justice or its independence, shall be punished by one to six months' imprisonment and a
fine of 25,000 to 100,000 FCFA.
The court may, in addition, order that its decision be posted and published under the conditions
it shall determine, in accordance with the legal provisions relating to the publication of
sentences.
The initiative for prosecution belongs to the Prosecutor General at the Court of Appeal.
The foregoing provisions may not, in any case, be applied to purely technical commentaries, nor to acts, words or writings tending towards the review of a conviction.
36

Art.145

‐ Shall be punished by the penalties provided for in the preceding article whoever has published, before
the intervention of the final jurisdictional decision, commentaries tending to exert
pressure on the statements of witnesses or on the decision of the investigating or trial
courts.
The provisions of the last three paragraphs of the preceding article are also applicable.

Section 2 ‐ Violence against members of the constituted bodies of the State

Art.146

‐ Any individual who, even without arms and without resulting injuries, has struck
a member of the Government or of the National Assembly, a magistrate, in the exercise of his
functions or on the occasion of that exercise, or committed any other violence or assault against
him in the same circumstances, shall be punished by imprisonment of six months to five years and
a fine of 5,000 to 50,000 FCFA.

Art.147

‐ Violence or assault of the kind expressed in the preceding article directed
against a ministerial officer, an agent of the public force, or a citizen charged with a
ministry of public service, if they took place while they were exercising their ministry or on that
occasion, shall be punished by imprisonment of one month to three years and a fine of 5,000 to
50,000 FCFA.

Art.143

‐ When the violence exercised against officials and agents as provided for
in Articles 146 and 147 above has caused bloodshed, wounds or illness, the
penalty shall be doubled. If death has ensued, the offender shall be punished by thirty years'
imprisonment.
When the blows have been struck or the wounds inflicted with intent to cause death and have
actually caused it, the offender shall be punished by life imprisonment.

Chapter 4 ‐ Escapes

Art.149

‐ Detainees who have escaped or who have attempted to escape, by breaking prison or
by violence, shall for that fact alone be punished by imprisonment of at least six months, which
may be increased up to a penalty equal to that for which they were detained, or if they
were held in preventive detention, to that attached by law to the charge that motivated the
detention, without it being able, in either case, to exceed five years' imprisonment,
all without prejudice to the heavier penalties they may have incurred for other crimes or
offences they may have committed in their violence.
They shall serve this penalty immediately after the expiration of that which they have incurred for
the crime or offence for which they were detained or immediately after the judgment or decision
that acquitted or absolved them of said crime or offence.
37

Shall be punished by the same penalty, which shall be served under the same conditions, any detainee transferred
to a health or hospital establishment who, by any means whatsoever, has escaped or
has attempted to escape from it, and any detainee who, employed outside the prison, or beneficiary of a
leave permit, has taken advantage of it to escape.

Art.150

‐ When a detainee or prisoner of war has escaped, the commanders in chief or in
subordinate command of the force responsible for the escort or posted in the establishment, the heads of
establishments, the guards and all other persons assigned to the conduct, transport or custody of
detainees or prisoners shall be punished:
• a) in case of negligence, by imprisonment of fifteen days to two years and a fine of
25,000 to 50,000 FCFA;
• b) in case of connivance in the escape, by imprisonment of six months to five years and a
fine of 10,000 to 100,000 FCFA.

Art.151

‐ The penalties provided for connivance shall be incurred when the persons
referred to in the preceding article have procured or facilitated, attempted to procure or facilitate an escape,
even if it has been neither consummated nor attempted and even though the preparations may have been
carried out without the knowledge of the detainee or prisoner. Connivance may result from a simple voluntary
abstention.

Art.152

‐ Persons other than those referred to in article 150 above who have procured,
facilitated, attempted to procure or facilitate an escape or facilitated the flight of the escapee shall be punished
by fifteen days to two years' imprisonment and a fine of
5,000 to 50,000 FCFA.

Art.153

‐ Shall be punished by imprisonment of fifteen days to six months anyone who has, under
irregular conditions, delivered or caused to reach or attempted to deliver or cause to reach a
detainee, in any place whatsoever, sums of money, correspondence or any
objects.
The removal or attempted irregular removal of sums of money, correspondence or any
objects, shall be punished by the same penalties.
The acts referred to in the two preceding paragraphs shall be considered as accomplished under
irregular conditions if they were committed in violation of a regulation emanating from the directorate of
the prison administration or approved by it.
If the offender is one of the persons designated in article 150 above or a person
authorized by their functions to approach in any capacity whatsoever the detainees, the penalty against them
shall be imprisonment of six months to two years.
38

Chapter 5 ‐ Disturbances by public officials Section 1 ‐

Coalitions of public officials

Art.154

‐ Subject to the regulations relating to the right to strike in force, any concerted
measures contrary to the laws, practiced either by the assembly of individuals or bodies holding
some part of public authority, or by deputation or correspondence between them, shall be punished
by imprisonment of two months to two years.
The deprivation of rights provided for in article 28 of this Code may in addition be pronounced.

Art.155

‐ Shall be punished by the penalties provided for in the preceding article, public officials who have, by
deliberation, decided to submit resignations the object or effect of which would be to prevent or
suspend either the administration of justice or the performance of any service.

Section 2 ‐ Illegally prolonged exercise of public authority

Art.156

‐ Any public official or any public authority dismissed, removed from office, suspended or legally
barred, who, after having had official knowledge thereof, has continued the exercise of their
functions, or who, being elective or temporary, has exercised them after having been replaced, shall be punished
by imprisonment of six months to two years and a fine of 25,000 to 100,000 FCFA.

Section 3 ‐ Refusal to respond to requisitions

Art.157

‐ Any commander of armed forces legally served with a requisition from the civil authority who
has refused or abstained from deploying the forces placed under their command shall be punished by
imprisonment of one to two years.

Art.158

‐ Witnesses and assessors who have alleged an excuse recognized as false shall be
sentenced, in addition to the fines pronounced for non-appearance, to imprisonment of
fifteen days to three months.
39

Chapter 6

‐ Encroachments on judicial functions and usurpations of titles or
functions

Section 1 ‐ Encroachments on judicial functions

Art.159

‐ Any public official or public agent who, without authority, has interfered in judicial
functions by taking cognizance of private rights and interests within the jurisdiction of the courts, and who, after the
claim of the parties or one of them, has nevertheless decided in the matter before
the superior authority has ruled, shall be punished by imprisonment of three months to one year
and a fine of 25,000 to 50,000 FCFA.

Section 2 ‐ Usurpation of titles or functions

Art.160

‐ Anyone who, without title, has interfered in public functions, civil or military,
or has performed the acts of one of these functions, shall be punished by imprisonment of three months to five years,
without prejudice to the penalty for forgery, if the act bears that character.

Art.161

‐ Any person who has publicly worn a costume, a uniform or a decoration
that they were not entitled to wear, or a costume presenting with the regulation
uniforms of the army, gendarmerie or police a resemblance of a nature to
deceive the public shall be punished by imprisonment of fifteen days to two years and a fine of
25,000 to 100,000 FCFA.

Art.162

‐ Shall be punished by the penalties provided for in the preceding article anyone who, without fulfilling the conditions
required to claim it, has used or claimed a title attached to a
legally regulated profession, an official diploma or a qualification whose conditions
of attribution have been fixed by the public authority.

Art.163

‐ Shall be punished by a fine of 25,000 to 100,000 FCFA anyone who, without right and with a view to
attributing to themselves an honorific distinction, has publicly taken an altered title or modified the name
assigned to them by civil status records.
The court shall order the notation of the judgment in the margin of authentic acts or civil status
records in which the title has been taken unduly or the name altered.

Art.164

‐ In the cases provided for by articles 162 and 163, the court may order the
publication of the judgment.

Art.165

‐ Is punished by a fine of 25,000 to 100,000 FCFA any person who, in a public
or authentic act or in an administrative document intended for the public authority and outside the
cases where the regulations in force authorize them to sign these acts or documents under a borrowed civil status
identity, has not taken the name that is legally theirs.
40

Title 3

‐ Offences against and obstruction of public freedoms, peace and public tranquillity

Chapter 1 ‐ Offences against and obstruction of public freedoms Section 1

‐ Offences against civic rights

Art.166

‐ Shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to three years and a fine of
10,000 to 100,000 FCFA or by only one of these two penalties anyone who, on polling day or
outside the legal period of electoral campaign:
• a) by granting or promising a particular advantage of any nature whatsoever,
influences the vote of an elector or determines him to abstain;
• b) by gifts, liberalities, favours, promises of granting public or private employment or other
particular advantages made with a view to influencing the vote of one or more electors, obtains
their vote either directly or through an intermediary;
• c) directly or through an intermediary, accepts or solicits from candidates, gifts,
liberalities, favours or advantages such as those cited in point b above;
• d) with the aim of favouring a candidate or a list of candidates, draws up false
minutes or proclaims results which he knows to be inaccurate or fraudulent.
The penalties provided for in paragraph 1 above are doubled when the influenced vote is that of an
electoral college or a fraction of that college.

Art.167

‐ Shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to three years and a fine of
10,000 to 100,000 FCFA or by only one of these two penalties anyone who, on polling day or
outside the legal period of electoral campaign:
• a) by assault or threats of any particular damage, determines an elector to
abstain;
• b) on polling day, insults or exercises violence against a polling commission or one of its
members, or by assault or threat, delays or prevents electoral operations;
• c) influences the vote of an elector, by assault, violence, or threats against him, or by
making him fear losing his employment, exposing to damage his person, his family or
his fortune;
• d) by gathering, clamour or threatening demonstrations, disturbs electoral
operations or infringes upon the exercise of the right or freedom of vote;
• e) on polling day, with violence, fraudulently removes the ballot box.

Art.168

‐ Shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to two years and a fine of
25,000 to 250,000 FCFA or by only one of these two penalties anyone who enters an
electoral assembly with a visible weapon.
The penalties provided for in the paragraph above are doubled if the weapon is concealed.
41

Art.169

‐ Except in the case of flagrant offence, no criminal prosecution for infringement of the
provisions of this section may be brought against a candidate before the
proclamation of results.

Section 2 ‐ Attacks on freedom

Art.170

‐ When a civil servant, a public agent or a Government appointee has
ordered or committed any arbitrary act or attack, either against individual freedom or against the
Constitution, he shall be sentenced to a penalty of six months to five years' imprisonment and
50,000 to 5,000,000 FCFA fine.
If, nevertheless, he proves that he acted by order of his superiors for matters within their jurisdiction,
for which hierarchical obedience was owed to them, he shall be exempt from the penalty, which shall,
in that case, be applied only to the superiors who gave the order.

Art.171

‐ If the Ministers accused of having ordered or authorized the act contrary to the
Constitution claim that the signature imputed to them was obtained by deception, they shall be required, while
terminating the act, to denounce the person they declare to be the author of the deception, otherwise they shall be
prosecuted personally.

Art.172

‐ Civil servants responsible for administrative or judicial police who have refused or
neglected to comply with a legal complaint seeking to establish illegal and
arbitrary detentions, either in houses intended for the custody of detainees, or anywhere else and who do not
prove that they have reported them to the superior authority, shall be punished by one month to one year
imprisonment and held liable for damages.

Art.173

‐ Custodians of penitentiary establishments who have received a prisoner without
a warrant or judgment, or those who have refused to present their registers to the
judicial authority shall, as guilty of arbitrary detention, be punished by six months to two years
imprisonment and a fine of 50,000 to 500,000 FCFA.

Art.174

‐ Shall be punished by the penalties provided for in article 172 above any judicial police officer,
any Attorney General or of the Republic, any deputy, any judge who has provoked, given or
signed a judgment, an order or a warrant tending to the personal prosecution or
accusation, either of a Minister or of a member of parliament without the authorizations prescribed by
the law, or who, except in cases of flagrant offence, has, without the same authorizations, given or signed
the order or warrant to seize or arrest one or more Ministers or members of parliament.

Art.175

‐ Shall be punished by the penalties set forth in article 173 above the Attorney General or the
Public Prosecutor, the deputy, the judge or the public officer who has detained or caused to be detained an
individual outside the places determined by the government or by the public administration.
42

Art.176

‐ When a civil servant or a public officer, an administrator, an agent or an
appointee of the government or of the police, an executor of judicial warrants or judgments, a
commander in chief or in subordinate command of the public force has, without legitimate reason, used or
committed violence against persons in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of his
functions, he shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to five years.
The supplementary penalties of article 28 of this Code may in addition be applied to them.

Section 3 ‐ Obstruction of freedoms

Art.177

‐ Shall be punished by imprisonment from six months to three years and a fine of
50,000 to 500,000 FCFA anyone who has used violence, assault, threats or
fraudulent manoeuvres to bring about or maintain, attempt to bring about or maintain a
concerted cessation of work, with the aim of forcing the increase or decrease of wages or of
infringing upon the free exercise of industry or work.

Art.178

‐ Those who, in public auctions, have obstructed or disturbed, attempted to obstruct
or disturb the freedom of bids or tenders, by assault, violence or
threats, either before or during the bids or tenders shall be punished by imprisonment
from fifteen days to three months and a fine of 100,000 to
1,000,000 FCFA.
The same penalty shall be pronounced against those who, by gifts, promises or fraudulent agreements
have excluded or attempted to exclude bidders, limited or attempted to limit bids or
tenders, as well as against those who have received these gifts or accepted these promises.
Shall be punished by the same penalty all those who, after a public auction, proceed or
participate in a re-auction without the participation of a competent ministerial officer.

Art.179

‐ Shall be punished by imprisonment of two months to two years and a fine of 500,000
to 20,000,000 FCFA those who have, directly or through an intermediary, operated or attempted
to operate an artificial increase or decrease in the price of foodstuffs or goods or public or private securities:
• a) by false or slanderous facts knowingly spread among the public, by offers thrown on
the market with the intention of disrupting prices, by overbids made at the prices requested by the
sellers themselves, by any fraudulent ways or means whatsoever;
• b) by exercising or attempting to exercise, either individually or by meeting or coalition,
an action on the market with the aim of obtaining a gain that would not be the result of the natural
interplay of supply and demand.
43

Art.180

‐ In all cases provided for by Article 177 above, the court may apply
the complementary penalties provided for in Article 28 of this Code. In addition, and
notwithstanding the application of the provisions on mitigating circumstances, it shall order that the
judgment of conviction be published.

Chapitre 2 ‐ Des atteintes à la paix et à la tranquillité publique Section

1 ‐ Des associations de malfaiteurs

Art.181

‐ The formation of an association, whatever its duration or the number of its members,
or of an agreement established for the purpose of preparing or committing offences against
persons or property constitutes an attack on public peace and is constitutive, in itself,
of a criminal offence.

Art.182

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of three to eight years anyone who has joined an
association formed or has participated in an agreement for the purpose specified in the preceding article.
The guilty parties shall be exempt from punishment if, before any prosecution, they have revealed to the authorities
the agreement established or have made known to them the existence of the association.

Art.183

‐ Shall be punished by the penalties provided for in Article 182 above, anyone who has knowingly and
voluntarily favoured the perpetrators of the acts provided for in Article 181 above, by providing them
with the instruments for committing the acts, means of correspondence, lodging or
place of meeting.
However, the provisions contained in paragraph 2 of Article 182 shall be applicable to the guilty parties of the acts provided for in this article.

Section 2 ‐ Du vagabondage et de la mendicité

Art.184

‐ Commits the offence of vagrancy and is punished by imprisonment of fifteen days to six
months, anyone who:
• a) not justifying either a fixed domicile or means of subsistence and who, not habitually exercising
any trade or profession, is found in a public place or a place open to the public;
• b) although justifying a fixed domicile, habitually derives his subsistence only from the
practice or facilitation on the public highway of illegal games.
When persons declared guilty of vagrancy are of foreign nationality, they
are expelled from the territory of the Republic at the expiration of their sentence.

Art.185

‐ Commits the offence of begging and is punished by imprisonment of fifteen days to six
months anyone who, having means of subsistence or being able to obtain them
44

by work, solicits charity in a place for which there exists a public establishment organized
to obviate begging.
The convicted person is, at the expiration of his sentence, taken to the begging depot.
When the acts indicated in paragraph 1 above are committed by habitual beggars,
but able-bodied, in places where there does not yet exist a public establishment organized to obviate
begging, the imprisonment shall be one to three months.
The penalty shall be imprisonment of six months to two years when the beggars, even disabled:
• a) have used threats;
• b) have entered, without permission of the owner or persons of his household, either into
a dwelling or into an enclosure dependent thereon;
• c) feign wounds or infirmities;
• d) beg in a group, unless it be husband and wife, father or mother and their
young children, the blind person and his guide.

Art.186

‐ Shall be punished by imprisonment of one to five years, any beggar or vagrant who:
• a) has been found disguised in any manner whatsoever;
• b) has been found carrying weapons, although he has neither used them nor threatened;
• c) has been found carrying instruments suitable either to commit thefts or other
offences, or to provide him with the means of entering houses.

Art.187

‐ Any beggar or vagrant who is found carrying one or more items
of a value exceeding 10,000 FCFA and cannot justify the origin of said items, shall be punished
by imprisonment of six months to two years.

Art.188

‐ Any beggar or vagrant who has exercised or attempted to exercise any act of violence
whatsoever against persons shall be punished by imprisonment of one to five years, without
prejudice to heavier penalties, if applicable, by reason of the nature and circumstances of the
violence.
If the beggar or vagrant who has exercised or attempted violence was, in addition, in one
of the circumstances expressed by Article 186 above, he shall be punished by one to five years
of imprisonment.

Section 3 ‐ De la pratique de sorcellerie et du charlatanisme

Art.189

‐ Commit the offence of practice of witchcraft and are, without prejudice to possible penalties
incurred for attacks on persons, fraud or any other crimes or offences,
punished by a penalty of one month to two years of imprisonment and a fine of 5,000 to 50,000
FCFA, those who engage in practices of divination or magic obeying no rule
of logic and whose results are likely to disturb public peace, to set
individuals against one another or to incite acts
45

of vengeance consisting of attacks on life or bodily integrity or also on
property.

Art.190

‐ Commit the offence of charlatanism and are punished by a penalty of one month to two years
of imprisonment and a fine of 5,000 to 50,000 FCFA those who ordinarily exploit
public credulity by promising advantages they know they cannot
provide or by offering objects they know do not possess the qualities or virtues they
claim.

Art.191

‐ When the practices mentioned in Articles 189 and 190 above have
caused either death or injuries or illnesses having resulted in incapacity for work, the
penalties shall be imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of 50,000 to 500,000 FCFA.

Titre 4 ‐ De la corruption et des infractions assimilées

Chapitre 1 ‐ De la corruption active et passive des agents publics

Art.192

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of one to ten years any public agent who has, without right, at
any time, directly or indirectly, solicited or accepted offers or promises or received
gifts or presents or other undue advantages for himself or for another person or
entity, to do or refrain from doing an act of his functions or his employment, for which
no remuneration is legally due.
This penalty is accompanied by the complementary penalty of confiscation provided for in Article 28 of this
Code.

Art.193

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of one to ten years anyone who has offered or granted to a public
agent, without right, at any time, directly or indirectly, promises,
gifts, presents or undue advantages, for himself or for another person or entity, so that he
may perform or refrain from performing an act of his functions or his employment, just or not,
but not subject to remuneration.
This penalty is accompanied by the complementary penalty of confiscation provided for in Article 28 of this
Code.

This excerpt sits under: Tchad > Livre 2 ‐ Des crimes et délits contre la Nation, l'Etat et la paix publique > Titre 3 > Chapitre 1 ‐ Des atteintes et entraves aux libertés publiques Section 1

Art.194

‐ The same penalties are incurred when the perpetrators of the offences provided for in
articles 192 and 193 above committed them in a group or conspired to conceal the
proceeds thereof.
46

Chapitre 2

‐ Misappropriation, embezzlement or any other unlawful use of property by
a public official

Art.195

‐ Any public official who, in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of his
functions, has embezzled or misappropriated public funds, effects in lieu thereof, or documents, titles,
deeds, property, materials, commodities or objects of any kind belonging to the State or to private individuals
is punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 100,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA.
Where the amount of the sums embezzled or misappropriated exceeds ten million francs, the
penalty incurred is imprisonment of five to twenty years.
These penalties are accompanied by the additional penalty of confiscation provided for in article 28 of
this Code.

Art.196

‐ Any public official who, if he was an accountant under the texts in force or
if he has been recognized as a de facto accountant, has embezzled or misappropriated funds or active effects in
lieu thereof or documents, titles, deeds, property, materials, commodities or objects of any kind belonging to
the State or to private individuals which were in his hands by virtue of his functions
is punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 100,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA.
Where the amount of the sums embezzled or misappropriated exceeds ten million francs, the
penalty incurred is imprisonment of five to twenty years.
These penalties are accompanied by the additional penalty of confiscation provided for in article 28 of
this Code.

Art.197

‐ The manager of any entity enjoying legal personality,
whether commercial or not, who, in collusion with any public official, has overvalued the value or the
sale or rental price of a property, service or supply in relation to the price commonly practiced
is punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA.
This penalty is accompanied by the additional penalty of confiscation provided for in article 28 of this
Code.
The public official who participated in this overvaluation is punished by the same penalties.
The manager of any entity enjoying legal personality, whether commercial or not, who, in
collusion with the managers of an entity having a public service mission, participated
in this overvaluation shall be punished by the same penalties.

Art.198

‐ Any person who has misappropriated,
embezzled or misappropriated weapons, explosives or war munitions is punished by imprisonment of ten to twenty years.
This penalty is mandatorily accompanied by the additional penalty of confiscation provided for in
article 31 of this Code.
47

Art.199

‐ Any person who has used, unlawfully, for his own benefit
or for the benefit of another person or any other entity, public property is punished by a fine at least equal to the value of the damage suffered by the State without
it being less than 200,000 FCFA.

Chapitre 3

‐ Illicit enrichment and other related offences Section 1 ‐
Illicit enrichment

Art.200

‐ Any holder of State authority who cannot justify the significant increase in his assets in relation to his legitimate income is punished by imprisonment of one to ten years and a fine of 100,000 to
10,000,000 FCFA.
Confiscation of the assets thus acquired is always ordered.

Art.201

‐ Publication of the judgment or conviction order may be ordered at the expense of the
convicted person.

Art.202

‐ The competent public services may constitute themselves as civil parties in order to seek
reparation for the damage caused to the public treasury.

Section 2 ‐ Other related offences

Art.203

‐ The act by any holder of State authority of granting in any
form whatsoever and for any reason whatsoever, total or partial exemptions or franchises not authorized by law on public duties and taxes or imposts or of delivering
free of charge the products of State establishments is punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 200,000 to
5,000,000 FCFA.

Art.204

‐ The act by any holder of State authority of establishing or approving
one or more sales, receipt, delivery or service documents to attest to the reality of an order or service not performed or partially performed in relation
to contractual commitments is punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 200,000 to
5,000,000 FCFA.

Art.205

‐ The act by any holder of State authority of manipulating for an abusive purpose the date of taking up duties of public officials, of fraudulently altering writings,
information or figures for the purpose of mandating or causing to be mandated undue sums for his own benefit and
for the benefit of a third party is punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 200,000 to
5,000,000 FCFA.
This penalty is accompanied by the additional penalty of confiscation provided for in article 28 of this
Code.
48

Chapitre 4 ‐ Obstruction of the proper functioning of justice

Art.206

‐ The act by anyone of resorting to physical force, threats or
intimidation or any other means, of promising, offering or granting an undue advantage
to obtain false testimony or prevent testimony for the presentation of evidence in proceedings relating to the commission of offences provided for in this
title is punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to
10,000,000 FCFA.

Art.207

‐ The act by anyone of resorting to physical force, threats or
intimidation or any other unlawful means to prevent an officer of justice or an officer of the
authorized investigation or enforcement services from exercising the duties of his office in relation to the
commission of one of the offences provided for in this title is punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to
10,000,000 FCFA.

Chapitre 5 ‐ Active and passive trading in influence

Art.208

‐ Anyone who offers or grants to a public official or any other person,
without right, at any time, directly or indirectly, an undue advantage so that said official or
said person abuses his real or supposed influence in order to obtain from an administration
or a public authority an undue advantage for himself or for a third party is punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to
10,000,000 FCFA.

Art.209

‐ Any public official or any other person who solicits, accepts, without right, at any
time, directly or indirectly, an undue advantage for himself or for another
person in order to use his real or supposed influence, with a view to obtaining from an
administration or a public authority an undue advantage is punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to
10,000,000 FCFA.

Chapitre 6 ‐ Abuse of functions

Art.210

‐ Any public official who has:
• 1) intentionally abused his functions or position, by performing or
refraining from performing, in the exercise of his functions, an act in order to obtain an undue
advantage for himself or for another person;
• 2) disclosed the identity or address of a whistleblower or a witness;
• 3) outside the cases where the law authorizes him to act as whistleblower, disclosed all or part of the
information known to him in the course of his functions is punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to
10,000,000 FCFA.
49

Chapitre 7

‐ Active and passive corruption by persons not exercising a
public function

This excerpt sits under: Tchad > Livre 2 ‐ Des crimes et délits contre la Nation, l'Etat et la paix publique > Titre 4 ‐ De la corruption et des infractions assimilées > Chapitre 1 ‐ De la corruption active et passive des agents publics

Art.211.‐ Is punished by imprisonment from six months to five years and a fine of

1,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA, the act by anyone, of promising, offering or granting promises, gifts, presents or other undue advantages, without right, at any time, directly or indirectly, to a person who, without being a depositary of public authority, nor charged with a public service mission, nor invested with an elective public mandate, exercises, within the framework of a professional or social activity, a management function or work for a natural or legal person under public or private law or for any organization, for themselves or for another person, so that, in violation of their duties, they perform or refrain from performing an act.
This penalty is accompanied by the complementary penalty of confiscation provided for in Article 28 of this Code.

Art.212

‐ Is punished by six months to five years imprisonment and a fine of 1,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA, the act by anyone who, without being a depositary of public authority nor charged with a public service mission, nor invested with an elective public mandate, exercises, within the framework of a professional or social activity, a management function or work for a natural or legal person under public or private law or for any organization, of soliciting or accepting, without right, at any time, directly or indirectly, offers or promises or receiving gifts or presents or other undue advantages for themselves or for another person, in order to perform or refrain from performing an act in violation of their duties.
This penalty is accompanied by the complementary penalty of confiscation provided for in Article 28 of this Code.

Chapitre 8 ‐ Aggravated fraud

Art.213

‐ Is punished by imprisonment from three to ten years and a fine equal to triple the value at stake, anyone who commits the offense of fraud when it is carried out:
• 1) by a person who is a depositary of public authority or charged with a public service mission in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of their functions;
• 2) by a person who unduly assumes the capacity of a person who is a depositary of public authority or charged with a public service mission;
• 3) by a person having made an appeal to the public with a view to the issuance of shares, bonds, vouchers, units or any securities whatsoever of either a company or a commercial or industrial enterprise;
50

• 4) to the detriment of a person whose particular vulnerability, due to their age, an illness, an infirmity, a physical or mental deficiency or a state of pregnancy, is apparent or known to its perpetrator;
• 5) in an organized gang, that is to say by a grouping formed or an understanding established for this purpose.

Art.214

‐ Is punished by imprisonment from one to five years and a fine whose maximum rate is equal to triple the value at stake, anyone who commits the offense of fraud provided for in Article 213 of this Code when the fraud is based on a permanent race between the collection of new funds and payments aimed at giving confidence.
When this fraud relates to an appeal to public savings, it is punished by imprisonment from five to ten years and a fine equal to triple the amount extorted.
This penalty is accompanied by the complementary penalty of confiscation provided for in Article 28 of this Code.

Chapitre 9 ‐ Corruption in relation to public procurement Art.215.‐ Is

punished by imprisonment from one to ten years and a fine of 500,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA, any person who, by non-observance of the rules for awarding, executing and monitoring public procurement, obtains or causes a third party to obtain, directly or indirectly, an undue advantage.

Art.216

‐ Also constitute acts of corruption in relation to public procurement and are punished in accordance with the provisions of Article 215 above:
• a) the award of a contract to a service provider without legal existence;
• b) the award of a contract with a company in financial distress, with third parties or companies in the suspect period of bankruptcy or judicial liquidation;
• c) the award of a contract with a company not presenting sufficient financial, economic and technical guarantees.

Art.217

‐ Constitute systematic negligence in relation to public procurement and are punished in accordance with the provisions of Article 215 above:
• a) the non-transmission, in a repeated manner, of files to members of the Procurement Commissions within the regulatory deadlines and forms;
• b) the non-convening, in a repeated manner, of the independent observer for contracts falling within their competence;
• c) the convening in disregard of deadline rules having the purpose or consequence of delaying the presence or causing the absence of members of the Commissions and the independent observer;
• d) the non-transmission, in a repeated manner, of documents to the body in charge of regularization of contracts within the regulatory deadlines;
• e) the non-termination of the contract in cases of termination by operation of law;
51

• f) the non-transmission of termination acts to the body in charge of regularization of public procurement;
• g) the non-payment of regulatory fees;
• h) the non-transmission of documents relating to the execution of contracts to the body in charge of regulation of public procurement.

Art.218

‐ Constitute a refusal of service due in relation to public procurement and are punished in accordance with the provisions of Article 215 above:
• a) the refusal to sell the tender file or the concealment of the tender file;
• b) the refusal to communicate to a tenderer, after their request, the documents to which they are entitled;
• c) unjustified delays in payments;
• d) the non-execution of prescriptions granted within the framework of pledging;
• e) the unjustified refusal of visa;
• f) the non-compliance with deadlines for approval of statements;
• g) the unjustified refusal to release securities or to issue the corresponding releases within the prescribed deadlines.

Art.219

‐ Constitute forgery in public and authentic writings in relation to public procurement and are punished in accordance with the provisions of Article 215 above:
• a) the change of contract stipulations without a related amendment duly adopted;
• b) the modification of the content of the final text of the draft contract in relation to the data of the tender file.

Art.220

‐ Constitutes forgery in private or commercial writing in relation to public procurement and is punished in accordance with the provisions of Article 215 above, the provision of false documents in the tender file.

Art.221

‐ Constitute extortion in relation to public procurement and are punished in accordance with the provisions of Article 215 above:
• a) the non-application of delay penalties;
• b) the lifting of penalties without prior authorization from the body in charge of regulation of the public procurement sector;
• c) the retention, without any valid reason, of a file.

Art.222

‐ Constitute favoritism in relation to public procurement and are punished in accordance with the provisions of Article 215 above:
• a) the communication in advance to a tenderer of information on the call for tenders with the aim of favoring them in relation to their competitors;
• b) the receipt of offers after the deadline;
• c) the steering of an evaluation.
52

Art.223

‐ Constitute misappropriation of public property or funds in relation to public procurement
and are punished in accordance with the provisions of Article 215 above:
• a) the misappropriation of operating expenses of public procurement commissions;
• b) the non-remittance of fees for acquisition of tender documents;
• c) the commitment of an expenditure relating to the operation of the public procurement
commission without supporting documents;
• d) the revision or updating of prices not provided for in the specifications or in violation
of the provisions of said specifications;
• e) the invoicing of fictitious services;
• f) the recording of erroneous services;
• g) the irregular affixing of visas on files tainted with irregularities;
• h) the commitment of an expenditure or the certification of documents without execution of
services;
• i) the settlement and payment of services not executed or not in conformity with the public
contract;
• j) the payment of a public contract in excess of its amount and that of its possible amendments;
• k) the acceptance of services not executed or not in conformity with the public contract;
• l) the certification of invoices for services not executed or not in conformity with the public
contract.

Chapitre 10 ‐ Du délit d'initié

Art.224

‐ Constitutes the offence of insider trading and is punished by imprisonment of six months to two years and
a fine of 1,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA, the act:
• a) for directors of a commercial or industrial company and for persons
having, in the course of exercising their profession or their functions,
privileged information on the situation or prospects of an issuer whose
securities are traded on the market, of carrying out or knowingly allowing to
be carried out, directly or through an intermediary, one or more transactions before the
public becomes aware of such information and with the aim of making an undue profit;
• b) for any person having in the course of exercising their profession or their functions,
privileged information on the situation or prospects of an issuer whose
securities are traded on a market, of communicating them to a third party outside
the normal framework of their profession or their functions and with the aim of making an undue
profit.
Also constitutes the offence of insider trading and is punished by the penalties provided for in paragraph I above, the act for
any person having in the course of exercising their functions, privileged
information subject to professional secrecy, relating to the implementation of a project by the State, a
decentralized authority or any other person under public law, of using said information
to allow themselves or allow others to take
53

acts for their benefit so as to delay the envisaged project or to burden it with
additional charges.
The penalties are doubled if the perpetrator of the acts is a civil servant or a public agent within the meaning of
this Code.

Art.225.‐ Is punished by imprisonment of two to five years and a fine of

200,000 to 2,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties, any person who, charged
by reason of their functions, with supervision of any enterprise, public corporation or concession, or with
the expression of opinions on the activities thereof, collaborates or participates in any manner whatsoever, in their financing or in their activity.

Art.226

‐ Are punished by the same penalties the acts described in the preceding article, committed
within a period of five years from the cessation of said functions, except if it concerns capital
received by way of inheritance.

Art.227

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 200,000 to
2,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties, any public agent who, charged with
a mission of administration even provisional of control, of supervision or charged with a
mission of administration even provisional of control, of supervision or of counsel of a
private enterprise, exercises after cessation of these functions, a corporate office or engages, even by
virtue of a contract, in a remunerated activity for this enterprise.

Chapitre 11 ‐ Du blanchiment d'argent

Art.228

‐ Are punished by five to ten years' imprisonment and a fine the maximum rate of which
is equal to three times the value of the property in question or the amount of the values concerned:
• 1) those who have knowingly converted or transferred property with the aim, either of concealing
or disguising the illicit origin of said property or resources, or of helping any person
involved in the commission of a crime or an offence to escape the legal consequences of their acts;
• 2) those who have knowingly, concealed or disguised the nature, origin, location,
disposition, movement or actual ownership of resources, property or rights relating thereto
originating from a crime or an offence;
• 3) those who, with the same aim, have knowingly acquired, held or used property originating
from a crime or an offence.
This penalty is accompanied by the additional penalty of confiscation provided for in Article 28 of this
Code.

Art.229

‐ Money laundering is punished by the penalty attached to the crime or offence having procured the
laundered property if it is more severe, when the perpetrator of the laundering had knowledge of these
offences.
54

Art.230

‐ The agreement or participation in an association with a view to the commission of an act
constituting money laundering and the association to commit said act, is punished by
imprisonment of three to seven years and a fine equal to three times the value of the property or
funds on which the laundering operations were carried out.

Chapitre 12 ‐ Dispositions communes à la corruption et aux infractions assimilées ou

connexes

Art.231

‐ In addition to a fine which cannot be less than 1,000,000 FCFA and the maximum rate of which
is equal to twice those provided for natural persons, legal persons
declared criminally liable for the offences provided for in this title incur the
following penalties or one of them:
• 1) the prohibition, for a period of one to five years at most, from exercising directly or
indirectly one or more professional or social activities;
• 2) the closure, for a period of one to five years at most, of the establishments or of one or
several of the establishments of the enterprise having served to commit the incriminated acts;
• 3) the penalty of confiscation of all movable or immovable property, whatever its nature,
having served to commit the offence or which were intended to commit it or which are the object or
the direct or indirect proceeds of the offence;
• 4) the posting for a period of three to six months of all or part of the decision,
or its dissemination, in the places or by the means indicated by the court.
The penalty of confiscation does not exclude the conviction of legal persons declared
criminally liable for the aforementioned offences to the payment of damages to
civil parties.

Art.232

‐ Subject to, where applicable, provisions providing for more severe penalties, the
violation of one of the prohibitions pronounced as an additional penalty in application
of Article 28 of this Code shall be punished by one to three years' imprisonment and a fine of
2,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties.
The additional penalty of confiscation does not exclude the conviction of the natural person
found guilty of one of the offences provided for in this Code to the payment of
damages to civil parties.

This excerpt sits under: Tchad > Livre 2 ‐ Des crimes et délits contre la Nation, l'Etat et la paix publique > Titre 4 ‐ De la corruption et des infractions assimilées > Chapitre 9 ‐ De la corruption en relation avec les marchés publics Art.215.‐ Est

Art.233

‐ Any holder of a decoration of the National Order of Chad, definitively convicted
of one of the crimes provided for by this Code, automatically loses the privilege of this distinction.
No application for rehabilitation is admissible.

Art.234.‐ Is punished by one to ten years' imprisonment and a fine of 500,000 to

10,000,000 FCFA, anyone who has knowingly kept, retained or held in whole or in part,
things removed, misappropriated or obtained, by means of one or more of the offences punished by this
title.
In the case where a more severe penalty is applicable to the act which procured the concealed things, the
convicted person shall be punished by the penalty attached by this title to the offence or to the circumstances of
the offence of which he had knowledge at the time of the concealment.

Art.235

‐ The attempt of the offences provided for by this title is punished as the offences
themselves.

Art.236

‐ When a person prosecuted for one of the offences provided for by this
title cooperates substantially in the investigation or prosecution by providing
factual and concrete assistance, thus contributing to identifying the perpetrators, co‐perpetrators, accomplices and receivers
of the offence and to depriving them of the proceeds of this offence or to recovering these proceeds, he may,
unless he is in a state of recidivism, benefit from mitigating circumstances.

Art.237

‐ When the perpetrator of acts constituting the offences provided for in articles 192, 193, 195,
196, 1997, 198, 200, 208, 211, 212, 213, 214, and 228 of this Code, cooperates
and pays the sums arising directly or indirectly from their commission or
obtained directly or indirectly by committing them, he may as the case may be, unless he is in
a state of recidivism, benefit from mitigating circumstances.
The decision recognizing mitigating circumstances must be expressly reasoned.

Art.238

‐ Natural persons found guilty of the offences provided for in this
title who have not paid the pecuniary convictions cannot obtain the benefit
of a remission of sentence.

Art.239

‐ Is punished by one to five years' imprisonment and a fine of 500,000 to
5,000,000 FCFA, anyone who engages in malicious denunciation or false testimony
with a view to having proceedings instituted or obtaining a conviction for an offence
provided for by this title.

Art.240

‐ Is punished by one to ten years' imprisonment anyone who resorts to physical force,
threats or intimidation, in reprisal against whistleblowers, witnesses, experts,
victims and their relatives on the occasion of proceedings conducted for the investigation of offences
provided for by this title.
56

Titre 5 ‐ Alterations of truth, forgery and counterfeiting

Chapitre 1 ‐ Forgery and counterfeiting

Section 1 ‐ Forgery and counterfeiting relating to currency

Art.241

‐ Anyone who has counterfeited or altered either currency having legal tender in Chad, or
banknotes authorized by law or notes of the same nature issued by the treasury, or
instruments issued by the treasury with its stamp or mark, anyone who has made use of such currency,
notes or counterfeited or altered instruments, anyone who has participated in their issue or introduction
into the territory, shall be punished by ten to twenty years' imprisonment.

Art.242

‐ The counterfeiting or alteration of foreign currency, foreign treasury instruments,
foreign banknotes, the issue, introduction into any country or use
of such counterfeited or altered currency, instruments or notes shall be punished as if they were
Chadian currency, treasury instruments or Chadian banknotes, according to the
distinctions set out in this title.
However, those who, abroad, have made themselves guilty as perpetrators or accomplices, of such
crimes or offences may only be prosecuted in Chad under the conditions provided for in
articles 7 to 12 of this Code.

Art.243

‐ Shall be punished by imprisonment of six months to three years anyone who has coloured
currency having legal tender in Chad or foreign currency with the aim of deceiving as to the
nature of the metal, or has issued or introduced them into Chadian territory.
Shall be punished by the same penalty anyone who has participated in the issue or introduction of currency
thus coloured.

Art.244

‐ Anyone who, having received in good faith counterfeited, altered or coloured currency or
counterfeited or altered instruments or notes, has made use of them after having verified them or had them verified,
shall be punished by fifteen days to six months' imprisonment and a fine equal to the sum
represented by the coins thus put back into circulation.

Art.245

‐ Counterfeited or altered currency, instruments and notes, shall be confiscated and destroyed.

Art.246

‐ Persons guilty of the crimes mentioned in articles 242 and 243 above
shall be exempt from penalty, if before the completion of these crimes and before any proceedings, they
gave notice of them and revealed the perpetrators to the constituted authorities, or if, even after
proceedings commenced, they procured the arrest of the other guilty parties.
They may nevertheless be prohibited from residing in certain areas.
57

Art.247

‐ There shall be pronounced against the guilty parties of the offences provided for in this section
a fine of which the minimum shall be 50,000 FCFA and the maximum
500,000 FCFA. The fine may however be increased up to one quarter of the illegitimate benefit
that the forgery has procured or was intended to procure for the perpetrators of the crime or offence, their
accomplices or those who have made use of the false item.

Section 2

‐ Falsifications and counterfeiting of seals, stamps, marks and hammers and
various other forgeries

Art.248

‐ Those who have counterfeited or falsified the seal of the State or made use of the counterfeited
or falsified seal, shall be punished by imprisonment of ten to twenty years.

Art.249

‐ Those who have counterfeited or falsified, either one or more national stamps, or the
State hammers used for forestry marks, or the punches used to mark
gold or silver materials, or who have made use of falsified or counterfeited papers, instruments, stamps, hammers or
punches, shall be punished by imprisonment of ten to fifteen years.

Art.250

‐ Shall be punished by imprisonment of ten to fifteen years anyone who, having unduly
obtained the true stamps, hammers or punches, has made an application or use of them
prejudicial to the rights or interests of the State.

Art.251

‐ Shall be punished by imprisonment of six months to five years and a fine of
300,000 to 3,000,000 FCFA, those who have:
• a) counterfeited the marks intended to be affixed in the name of the Government on the various
kinds of foodstuffs or goods, or who have made use of these false marks;
• b) counterfeited the seals, stamps or marks of any authority whatsoever or who have made
use of counterfeited seals, stamps or marks;
• c) counterfeited the letterheads or official printed matter in use in the assemblies instituted
by the Constitution, public administrations or the different courts, who have
sold, hawked or distributed them, or who have made use of the papers or printed matter thus
counterfeited;
• d) counterfeited or falsified the postage stamp, franking impressions or reply coupons
issued by the Chadian postal administration and mobile stamps, who have sold,
hawked, distributed or knowingly used said counterfeited or falsified stamps, impressions or reply coupons.

Art.252

‐ Whoever, having unduly obtained or printed genuine seals, stamps, marks,
or stamps provided for in Article 250, shall have made or attempted to make fraudulent application or use thereof,
shall be punished by the penalties provided for in the said article.

Art.253

‐ Shall be punished by imprisonment from one month to six months and a fine of
50,000 to 150,000 FCFA, those who:
• a) shall have manufactured, sold, peddled or distributed any printed objects or forms obtained
by any process whatsoever, which, by their external form would present
58

with coins or banknotes having legal tender in Chad or
abroad, with annuity certificates, vignettes and stamps of the postal and
telecommunications service or of State monopolies, shares, bonds, interest shares, dividend coupons or
interest thereon and generally with fiduciary securities issued by
the State, territorial collectivities and public establishments as well as by companies,
companies or private enterprises, a resemblance likely to facilitate the acceptance of the said
objects, printed matter or forms, in place of the imitated securities;
• b) shall have manufactured, sold, peddled, distributed or used printed matter which, by its format,
its colour, its text, its typographical arrangement or any other characteristic,
would present, with letterheads or official printed matter in use in the assemblies
established by the Constitution, public administrations and related jurisdictions, a
resemblance likely to cause confusion in the mind of the public;
• c) shall have knowingly made use of postage stamps or mobile stamps having already been used,
as well as those who shall have, by any means, altered stamps with the aim of removing them from
cancellation and thus permitting their reuse;
• d) shall have overprinted, by printing, perforation or any other means, postage stamps or
other postal fiduciary securities, expired or not, with the exception of operations
prescribed by the postal office on its own account, as well as those who shall have sold,
peddled, offered, distributed, exported, postage stamps thus overprinted;
• e) shall have counterfeited, imitated or altered the vignettes, stamps, franking impressions,
or reply coupons issued by the postal service of a foreign country who shall have sold,
peddled or distributed the said vignettes, stamps, franking impressions or
reply coupons or who shall have made use thereof;
• f) shall have counterfeited, imitated or altered national or foreign postal identity cards,
subscription cards remaining at the post office, who shall have sold, peddled or distributed the said
cards or shall have made use thereof.

Art.254

‐ The legal provisions relating to the prohibition of certain rights provided for in Article
28 of this Code may be applied to persons convicted under the articles
contained in sections 1 and 2 of this chapter.

Section 3 ‐ Forgery and use of forgery in public and authentic instruments

Art.255

‐ Is punished by imprisonment from fifteen to twenty years any civil servant or public officer
who, in the exercise of his functions, commits a forgery:
• a) by false signature;
• b) by alteration of instruments, writings or signatures;
• c) by substitution of persons;
• d) by writings made or inserted in registers or other public instruments, after their
preparation or closing.

Art.256

‐ Is punished by imprisonment from fifteen to twenty years any civil servant or public officer
who, in drafting instruments of his ministry, shall have fraudulently
59

distorted the substance or circumstances thereof, either by writing agreements other than those which
would have been drawn up or dictated by the parties, or by recording as true false facts, or
as acknowledged facts which were not.

Art.257

‐ Is punished by imprisonment from fifteen to twenty years, any person who commits a
forgery in authentic or public writing:
• a) by counterfeiting or alteration of writings or signatures;
• b) by fabrication of agreements, dispositions, obligations or discharges, or by their
subsequent insertion in these instruments;
• c) by addition or alteration of clauses, declarations or facts which these instruments were
intended to receive and record, shall be punished by the penalty of hard labour for a fixed term.
Shall be punished by the same penalty, any administrator or military accountant who shall knowingly enter
on the rolls, situation or review statements, men, animals, equipment or days of
presence beyond the actual strength.

Art.258

‐ Whoever shall have knowingly made use of false instruments shall be punished by the penalty provided
for the forger.

Art.259

‐ The complementary penalties provided for in Article 28 of this Code may be
applied to persons convicted under this section.

Section 4

‐ Forgeries committed in certain administrative documents, in travel
warrants and certificates

Art.260

‐ Whoever shall have counterfeited, falsified or attempted to counterfeit, falsify or alter a
hunting permit, certificate, booklet, card, bulletin, receipt, passport, pass or other
document issued by public administrations with a view to establishing a right, an identity or
a quality or to granting an authorization, shall be punished by imprisonment from three months to
three years and a fine of 50,000 to
500,000 FCFA.
The same penalties shall be applied to:
• a) whoever shall have made use of the said documents when certain of its statements
relating to the interested party have ceased to be accurate;
• b) whoever shall have made use of one of these documents when certain of its statements
relating to the interested party have ceased to be accurate.

Art.261

‐ Whoever shall have obtained or attempted to obtain unduly one of the
documents provided for in the preceding article, either by making false declarations, or by taking a
false name or a false quality, or by providing false information, certificates or
attestations, shall be punished by the penalties provided for in the said article.
The same penalties shall be applied to whoever shall have made use of a document obtained in the
conditions referred to in the preceding paragraph or established under a name other than his own.
60

The civil servant who shall have issued or caused to be issued a false document of the kind specified in this
article to a person whom he knows not to be entitled thereto shall be punished by the same penalties. The
complementary penalties provided for in Article 28 of this Code may in addition be applied to him.

Art.262

‐ Lodging-house keepers who, knowingly, shall enter in their registers, under false or
assumed names, persons lodging with them, or who, in collusion with them, shall have omitted to
register them, shall be punished by imprisonment from ten days to three months.

Art.263

‐ Public officers who shall issue or cause to be issued a passport to a person
whom they do not know personally without having had his names and qualities attested by two
citizens known to them, shall be punished by imprisonment from one month to six months.
If the public officer, informed of the substitution of name, has nevertheless issued or caused to be issued the
passport under the assumed name, he shall be punished by one to five years' imprisonment.

Art.264

‐ Whoever manufactures a false travel warrant, or falsifies a travel warrant
originally genuine, or makes use of a travel warrant manufactured or falsified, is punished by
imprisonment from six months to two years.

Art.265

‐ The penalties set forth in the preceding article are applied to any person who obtains
from the public officer a travel warrant issued under a name other than his own.
If the public officer was informed of the substitution of name, when he issued the travel warrant, he is
punished by imprisonment from one to five years.

Art.266

‐ Any person who, in order to exempt themselves or free another from any public service, fabricates, under the name of a doctor or surgeon, a certificate of illness or infirmity is punished by imprisonment of one to three years.

Art.267

‐ Except in the case of active and passive corruption provided for in articles 192 and 193 of this Code and without prejudice to the provisions relating to medical confidentiality, any doctor, dental surgeon, midwife or health service agent duly authorized who, in the exercise of their functions and to favor someone, falsely certifies or conceals the existence of illnesses or infirmities or a state of pregnancy, or provides false information on the origin of an illness or infirmity or the cause of a death, is punished by imprisonment of one to three years.

Art.268

‐ Whoever fabricates, under the name of a public official or officer, a certificate of good conduct, indigence or other circumstances likely to call the benevolence of the Government or private individuals upon the designated person, and to procure for them a position, credit or assistance, is punished by imprisonment of six months to two years.
The same penalty is applied to:
61

• a) whoever falsifies a certificate of this kind, originally genuine, to attribute it to a person other than the one to whom it was originally issued;
• b) any individual who uses the certificate thus fabricated or falsified.
If this certificate is fabricated under the name of a simple private individual, the fabrication and use are punished by fifteen days to six months imprisonment.

Art.269.‐ Shall be punished by imprisonment of six months to two years without prejudice to

the application, where applicable, of the heavier penalties provided for by this Code and special laws, whoever:
• a) shall have knowingly drawn up an attestation or certificate stating materially inaccurate facts;
• b) shall have falsified or modified in any manner an attestation or certificate originally sincere;
• c) shall have knowingly made use of an inaccurate or falsified attestation or certificate.

Art.270

‐ False certificates of any nature, and from which could result either injury to third parties or prejudice to the public treasury, shall be punished according to the provisions contained in the first section of this chapter.

Art.271

‐ Whoever shall have taken the name of a third party in circumstances which have determined or which could have determined the recording of a conviction in the latter's criminal record shall be punished by six months to five years imprisonment and a fine of 50,000 to 500,000 FCFA, without prejudice to prosecutions to be brought where applicable for forgery.
Shall be punished by the same penalty whoever, by false declarations relating to the civil status of an accused person, shall have knowingly been the cause of the recording of a conviction on the criminal record of another than that accused person.

Art.272

‐ Whoever, by taking a false name or false capacity, shall have obtained an extract from the criminal record of a third party, shall be punished by one month to one year imprisonment.
Whoever, by providing imaginary identity information about themselves, causes erroneous entries in the criminal record shall be punished by one to six months imprisonment.

Chapitre 2 ‐ Des faux témoignages et des infractions voisines

Art.273

‐ Is guilty of false testimony in criminal or correctional matters and is punished by imprisonment of one to ten years, whoever, testifying as a witness in criminal or correctional proceedings, affirms as false a fact which they know to be true or as true a fact contrary to reality.
62

False testimony is punishable by imprisonment of one month to one year and a fine of 5,000 to 100,000 FCFA, when the proceedings constitute simple police proceedings.
In case of false testimony in civil, social, commercial or administrative judicial proceedings, the penalty is imprisonment of six months to five years and a fine of 50,000 to 500,000 FCFA.

Art.274

‐ Whoever, either during proceedings and in any event, or in any matter with a view to a claim or defense in court, uses promises, offers or gifts, pressure, threats, acts of violence, maneuvers or artifices to induce another to make or deliver a false deposition, declaration or attestation, shall, whether or not this subornation has produced its effect, be punished by imprisonment of six months to five years and a fine of 100,000 to 1,000,000 FCFA.
The interpreter who, in criminal, correctional or civil matters, shall have in bad faith distorted the substance of words or documents orally translated, shall be punished by the penalties provided for in paragraph 1 above.

Art.275

‐ He to whom the oath shall have been deferred or referred in civil matters and who shall have made a false oath shall be liable to imprisonment of six months to five years and a fine of 50,000 to 500,000 FCFA.

Art.276

‐ The subornation of an interpreter shall be punished as the subornation of witnesses according to the provisions of article 274 above.

Art.277

‐ Shall be punished by imprisonment of fifteen days to two years whoever, knowing the proof of the innocence of a person charged, accused or convicted of a crime or offense, shall not have brought testimony thereof to the competent authorities.

Art.278

‐ Notwithstanding the provisions of the preceding article, no penalty shall be pronounced against whoever shall have brought their testimony belatedly but spontaneously.

Art.279

‐ The complementary penalties provided for in article 28 of this Code shall be applicable to the offenses provided for in this chapter.

Title 6 ‐ Piracy

Chapter 1 ‐ Unlawful acts against civil aviation

Art.280

‐ Any person who commits an act contrary to the provisions of civil aviation regulations and of a nature to endanger or endangering the safety of an aircraft in flight or on the ground, persons or property on board, is guilty of an unlawful act against the safety of civil aviation and is punished by life imprisonment.
63

Any person who commits any of the following acts is also guilty of an unlawful act against the safety of civil aviation and punished by life imprisonment:
• a) seizes by violence or threat of violence an aircraft in flight, in service or out of service, or exercises control over it;
• b) destroys or seriously damages installations of a national or international airport serving civil aviation;
• c) impairs or disrupts air navigation services;
• d) destroys or seriously damages aircraft parked at a Chadian airport or in service;
• e) makes threats of any kind or commits acts of unlawful interference directed against passengers, crews, ground personnel or the public;
• f) commits against a person or property, in an airport, an act of violence which causes or is likely to cause serious injury or death to that person or destruction of that property, or if that act endangers or is likely to endanger safety in that airport;
• g) destroys or damages air navigation aids;
• h) communicates false information likely to endanger the safety of an aircraft in flight;
• i) introduces or participates in the introduction on board an aircraft of devices or substances likely to destroy or damage the aircraft or endanger the flight;
• j) uses an aircraft in service for the purpose of causing death, or causing serious bodily injury or serious damage to property or the environment;
• k) manufactures or transports unmarked explosives, except where they are authorized military devices within the meaning of the Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives for the Purpose of Detection.
Any person who, using a device, substance or weapon, commits any of the following acts is also guilty of an unlawful act against the safety of civil aviation and punished by life imprisonment:
• a) commits against a person, in an airport serving national or international civil aviation, an act of violence which causes or is likely to cause serious injury or death;
• b) destroys or seriously damages the installations of an airport serving national or international civil aviation or aircraft not in service located in the airport, or disrupts the services of the airport, if that act endangers or is likely to endanger safety in that airport.

Chapter 2

‐ Unlawful acts against maritime navigation and fixed platforms

Art.281

‐ Any person who commits an act contrary to the provisions of regulations relating to the safety of maritime navigation of a nature to endanger or endangering the safety of a ship at sea or in a port, persons or property on board, or good order and discipline on board, is guilty of an offence against the safety of maritime navigation and is punished by life imprisonment.
64

Any person who unlawfully commits any of the following acts is also guilty of an offence against the safety of maritime navigation and punished by life imprisonment:
• a) seizes by violence or threat of violence a ship under way, in service or out of service, or exercises control over it;
• b) destroys or seriously damages installations of a national or international port serving maritime navigation;
• c) destroys or seriously damages ships stationed in a port or in service;
• d) makes threats of any kind or commits acts of unlawful interference directed against passengers, crews, ground personnel or the public;
• e) commits against a person or property in a port, an act of violence which causes or is likely to cause serious injury or death to that person or destruction of that property, if that act endangers or is likely to endanger safety in that port;
• f) destroys or damages maritime navigation aids;
• g) communicates false information likely to endanger the safety of navigation of a ship;
• h) introduces or participates in the introduction on board a ship of devices or substances likely to destroy or damage the ship or its cargo or endanger the navigation of the ship;
• i) manufactures or transports unmarked explosives, except where they are authorized military devices within the meaning of the Convention on the Marking of Plastic Explosives for the Purpose of Detection.

Art.282

‐ Any person who commits any of the following acts is guilty of an offence against the safety of fixed platforms and is punished by life imprisonment:
• a) seizes a platform or exercises control over it, by violence or threat of violence;
• b) destroys a platform or causes damage to it likely to endanger its safety;
• c) commits an act of violence against a person on board a platform, if that act is likely to endanger the safety of the platform;
• d) places or causes to be placed on a platform, by any means whatsoever, a device or substance capable of destroying the platform or likely to endanger its safety;
• e) causes injury or death to a person, where such acts are connected with offences provided for in points a, b, c and d above.

Art.283

‐ Any person who commits any of the following acts is guilty of an offence against the safety of fixed platforms and is punished by life imprisonment:
• a) uses against or on board a ship or fixed platform, or discharges from a ship or fixed platform, radioactive materials, explosives or BCN weapons, in a manner that causes or is likely to cause death or serious damage;
65

• b) discharges, from a ship or fixed platform, hydrocarbons, liquefied natural gas, or other harmful or potentially dangerous substances, not covered by paragraph a), in such quantity or concentration as causes or is likely to cause serious bodily or material damage;
• c) uses a ship in a manner that causes death or serious bodily or material damage;
• d) commits an act which, by its nature or context, is intended to intimidate a population or to compel a Government, an international or intergovernmental organization to do or abstain from doing any act.
Any person who threatens to commit one of the offences provided for in paragraph 1 is punished by the same penalty.

Art.284

‐ Public prosecution for offences provided for in this title is not subject to any statute of limitations.

Book 3 ‐ War crimes

Title 1

‐ War crimes resulting from grave breaches of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949

Art.285

‐ Is guilty of a war crime and punished by life imprisonment anyone who, in time of international armed conflict, commits the following grave breaches, when they target persons or property protected by the provisions of the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949:
• a) assassination;
• b) murder;
• c) torture or inhuman treatment, including biological experiments;
• d) intentionally causing great suffering or seriously injuring physical or mental integrity or health;
• e) destruction and appropriation of property, not justified by military necessity and carried out on a large scale in an unlawful and arbitrary manner;
• f) compelling a prisoner of war or any other protected person to serve in the armed forces of a hostile power;
• g) intentionally depriving a prisoner of war or any other protected person of his right to a fair and regular trial;
• h) deportation, unlawful detention or transfer of persons;
• i) taking of hostages.
66

Titre 2

‐ War crimes resulting from violations of laws and customs applicable to international armed conflicts

Art.286

‐ Is guilty of a war crime and is punished by life imprisonment, whoever
engages in the serious violations, indicated below, of the laws and customs applicable to international
armed conflicts within the established framework of international law:
• a) intentional attacks against the civilian population as such or against civilians not taking direct part in hostilities;
• b) intentional attacks against civilian objects that do not constitute military objectives;
• c) intentional attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or vehicles involved in a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations, insofar as they are entitled to the protection that international law of armed conflicts guarantees to civilians and civilian objects;
• d) intentional attacks, knowing that they will incidentally cause loss of life and injury to civilian populations, damage to civilian objects or widespread, long-term and severe damage to the natural environment, which would be excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated;
• e) intentional attacks against works or installations containing dangerous forces, knowing that such attack will cause loss of life, injury to civilians or damage to civilian objects, which would be excessive in relation to the concrete and direct military advantage anticipated, resulting in loss of life or serious harm to physical integrity or health;
• f) the attack or bombardment by any means whatsoever, of towns, villages, dwellings or buildings which are undefended and which do not constitute military objectives, as well as attacking unidentified localities or demilitarized zones;
• g) the killing or wounding of combatants who have laid down their arms or who no longer have means of defence and who have surrendered at discretion;
• h) the improper use of a flag of truce, of the flag or military insignia, of the uniform of the enemy or of the United Nations as well as the distinctive protective emblems provided for by the Geneva Conventions resulting in loss of human life or serious injury;
• i) the direct or indirect transfer, by an occupying power of parts of its own civilian population, into the territory it occupies, or the deportation or transfer within or outside the occupied territory of all or part of the population of that territory;
• j) any unjustified and intentional delay in the repatriation of prisoners of war or civilians, resulting in loss of life or serious harm to physical integrity or health;
• k) intentional attacks against buildings dedicated to religion, education, art, science or charitable purposes, historic monuments, hospitals and places where the sick or wounded are collected provided that such buildings are not military objectives;
• l) the practices of apartheid and other inhuman and degrading practices based on racial discrimination, which give rise to outrages upon personal dignity, resulting in loss of life or serious harm to physical integrity or health;
• m) subjecting persons of the adverse party who have fallen into one's power, to mutilations or to medical or scientific experiments of any kind, to removal of tissue or organs for transplantation which are neither justified by medical, dental or hospital treatment, nor carried out in the interest of such persons, and which cause death or seriously endanger their life or health;
• n) killing or wounding treacherously individuals belonging to the hostile nation or army;
• o) declaring that no quarter will be given;
• p) the destruction or seizure of property of the adverse party except where such destruction or seizure is imperatively demanded by the necessities of war;
• q) declaring abolished, suspended or inadmissible in a court of law the rights and actions of nationals of the adverse party;
• r) compelling nationals of the adverse party to take part in the operations of war directed against their own country, even if such nationals were in the service of said belligerent before the commencement of hostilities;
• s) pillaging a town or place, even when taken by assault;
• t) the use of poison or poisoned weapons;
• u) the employment of asphyxiating, toxic or similar gases or any other liquid, material or similar process;
• v) the use of bullets which expand or flatten easily in the human body, such as bullets with a hard envelope which does not entirely cover the core or is pierced with incisions;
• w) the use of weapons, projectiles, material and methods of combat of a nature to cause superfluous injury or unnecessary suffering or to strike indiscriminately, in violation of international law of armed conflicts, provided that such weapons, projectiles, material and methods of combat are the subject of a general prohibition under customary law or any other relevant instrument of international humanitarian law;
• x) outrages upon personal dignity, in particular humiliating and degrading treatment;
• y) rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization or any other form of sexual violence constituting a grave breach of the Geneva Conventions;
• z) utilizing the presence of a civilian or a protected person to render certain points, areas or military forces immune from military operations;
• aa) intentional attacks against buildings, material, units and means of medical transport and personnel using, in conformity with international law, the distinctive emblems provided for by the Geneva Conventions;
• bb) intentionally using starvation of civilians as a method of warfare, in particular by depriving them of objects indispensable to their survival, including by intentionally impeding relief supplies as provided for under the Geneva Conventions;
• cc) conscripting or enlisting children under the age of 18 years into the national armed forces or their active participation in hostilities.

Title 3 ‐ War crimes resulting from violations of Article 3 common to

the Geneva Conventions of 12 August 1949

Art.287

‐ Is guilty of a war crime and is punished by life imprisonment anyone who,
in the case of an armed conflict not of an international character, excluding
situations of internal disturbances and tensions such as riots, isolated and sporadic acts of
violence or acts of a similar nature, engages in serious violations of
international Conventions, in particular common article 3 of the Geneva Conventions,
consisting of any of the acts indicated below, committed against persons
who do not take a direct part in hostilities, including members of armed forces who
have laid down their arms and persons who have been placed hors de combat by sickness, wounds,
detention or any other cause:
• a) violence to life and person, in particular murder of all kinds,
mutilations, cruel treatment and torture;
• b) outrages upon personal dignity, in particular humiliating and degrading treatment;
• c) taking of hostages;
• d) the passing of sentences and the carrying out of executions without previous judgment
pronounced by a regularly constituted court, affording all the judicial
guarantees which are recognized as indispensable.

Titre 4

‐ War crimes resulting from violations of the laws and customs applicable to
non-international armed conflicts

Art.288

‐ Is guilty of a war crime and is punished by life imprisonment, anyone who
engages in serious violations of the laws and customs applicable to armed conflicts not
of an international character, excluding situations of internal disturbances and tensions
such as riots, isolated and sporadic acts of violence or acts of a similar nature,
that is to say armed conflicts which take place in a protracted manner, on the national territory, between
governmental authorities and organized armed groups or organized armed groups
among themselves, within the framework of international law, violations consisting of any of the acts
hereinafter:
69

• a) intentional attacks against the civilian population as such or against civilians not
taking direct part in hostilities;
• b) intentional attacks against buildings, material, units and means of medical transport
and personnel using, in conformity with international law, the distinctive emblems
of the Geneva Conventions;
• c) intentional attacks against personnel, installations, material, units or
vehicles employed in the context of a humanitarian assistance or peacekeeping
mission in accordance with the Charter of the United Nations insofar as they are entitled to the protection
that international law of armed conflict guarantees to civilians and civilian objects;
• d) intentional attacks against buildings dedicated to religion, education,
art, science or charitable purposes, historic monuments, hospitals and
places where sick and wounded are collected provided that such buildings are not
military objectives;
• e) pillaging a town or place even when taken by assault;
• f) rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization or
any other form of sexual violence constituting a serious violation of the Geneva
Conventions;
• g) conscripting or enlisting children under 18 years of age into the armed forces or
into armed groups or their active participation in hostilities;
• h) ordering the displacement or the displacement of civilian populations for reasons related
to the conflict, except where the security of said populations or imperative military reasons
so demand;
• i) killing or wounding treacherously adversary combatants;
• j) declaring that no quarter will be given;
• k) subjecting persons of another party to the conflict who have fallen into its power to
mutilations or to medical or scientific experiments of any kind, which are
neither justified by medical, dental, or hospital treatment nor carried out in the interest
of these persons, and which cause death to or seriously endanger the
health of such persons;
• l) destroying or seizing the property of an adversary unless such destruction and seizure
are imperatively demanded by the necessities of the conflict;
• m) the use of poison or poisoned weapons;
• n) the employment of asphyxiating, poisonous or similar gases or any other liquid, material or
similar device;
• o) the use of bullets which expand or flatten easily in the human body,
such as bullets with a hard envelope which does not entirely cover the core or is pierced
with incisions.
70

Titre 5

‐ Crimes resulting from other violations of international humanitarian law

Art.289

‐ Is punished by life imprisonment anyone who commits, in time of armed conflict, the
following serious violations of treaties on international humanitarian law:
• a) attacking a protected cultural property or under enhanced protection;
• b) using a cultural property under enhanced protection or its immediate surroundings in support
of military action;
• c) destroying or appropriating on a large scale cultural property protected by
international Conventions.

Titre 6

‐ Responsibility of military commanders and other superiors
for the acts of their subordinates

Art.290

‐ The order, even if not carried out, to commit one of the offences provided for in this
book is punished by the same penalties as the completed offence.
The military commander, a person effectively acting as a military commander or any other
superior is responsible for the offences provided for in this
book, committed by subordinates placed under his authority and effective control, to the extent that the
superior knew or should have, by reason of the circumstances, known that these subordinates
were committing or were going to commit these offences and for which he did not take all the
necessary reasonable measures within his power to prevent their
commission or he did not take the sanctions justified by the acts committed or he did not
refer the matter to the competent authorities for the purposes of investigation.
The order of the superior, military or civilian or of the Government cannot exonerate from
his responsibility the perpetrator of an offence referred to in this book, unless the following three conditions
are met:
• a) the perpetrator of the offence had a legal obligation to obey the orders of the
Government or the superior concerned;
• b) the perpetrator of the offence did not know the unlawful nature of the order;
• c) the order was not manifestly unlawful.
For the purposes of applying the provisions of this book, the order to commit one of the
offences referred to therein is deemed always manifestly unlawful.

Art.291

‐ The public prosecution relating to the offences provided for in this book as well as the sentences
pronounced are not subject to any statute of limitations.
71

Book 4 ‐ Crimes and offences against groups of persons and persons

Title 1 ‐ Crimes against humanity

Art.292

‐ Is guilty of a crime against humanity and is punished by life imprisonment anyone who,
as part of a widespread or systematic attack directed against any civilian population with
knowledge of the attack, commits any of the following acts:
• a) assassination;
• b) murder;
• c) extermination;
• d) fatal blows;
• e) enslavement;
• f) deportation or forcible transfer of population;
• g) imprisonment or other severe deprivation of physical liberty in violation of
fundamental provisions of international law;
• h) torture;
• i) rape, sexual slavery, enforced prostitution, forced pregnancy, enforced sterilization or
any other form of sexual violence of comparable gravity;
• j) persecution of any group or any identifiable collectivity on political, racial, national, ethnic, cultural, religious or gender grounds, the term gender being understood as referring to
both sexes, male and female in the context of society, or on the basis
of other criteria universally recognized as impermissible under international law, in
connection with any act referred to in this paragraph or any war crime or genocide;
• k) enforced disappearance of persons;
• l) the crime of apartheid;
• m) any other inhumane act of a similar character intentionally causing great
suffering or serious injury to physical integrity or to physical or
mental health.
For the purposes of this article, the following are understood as:
• a) "attack directed against a civilian population" means conduct which consists of the
multiple commission of acts referred to in paragraph I above against any civilian population
whatsoever, pursuant to or in furtherance of a State or organizational
policy to commit such attack;
• b) "extermination" means the intentional infliction of conditions of life, such as the
deprivation of access to food and medicine, calculated to bring about the destruction
of part of a population;
• c) "enslavement" means the exercise of any or all of the powers attaching to the right of ownership over a person, including in the course of trafficking in
human beings, in particular women and children;
72

• d) "deportation or forcible transfer of population" means the forced displacement of persons,
by expulsion or other coercive means, from the area where they are lawfully present,
without grounds permitted under international law;
• e) "torture" means the intentional infliction of severe pain or suffering, whether
physical or mental, upon a person in the custody or under the control of the accused; provided that
the meaning of this term does not extend to pain or suffering arising only from, inherent in or incidental to lawful sanctions;
• f) "forced pregnancy" means the unlawful confinement of a woman forcibly made pregnant, with the intent
of affecting the ethnic composition of any population or carrying out other serious violations
of international law, provided that this definition shall in no way be
interpreted as affecting national laws relating to pregnancy;
• g) "persecution" means the intentional and severe deprivation of fundamental rights contrary to international law, by reason of the identity of the group or collectivity targeted;
• h) "crime of apartheid" means inhumane acts similar to those referred to in paragraph 1 above,
committed in the context of an institutionalized regime of systematic oppression and
domination by one racial group over any other racial group or groups and with
the intention of maintaining that regime;
• i) "enforced disappearance of persons" means cases where persons are arrested, detained or
abducted by a State or a political organization or with the authorization, support or
acquiescence of such State or organization, which then refuses to acknowledge that those
persons are deprived of their liberty or to reveal their fate or whereabouts, with the intention of removing them from the protection of the law for a prolonged
period of time.

Art.293

‐ A military commander, a person effectively acting as a military commander or any
other superior is responsible for the offences provided for in this title, committed by
subordinates under his authority and effective control, to the extent that the
superior knew or should have, owing to the circumstances, known that those subordinates
were committing or were about to commit such offences and for which he did not take all
reasonable necessary measures within his power to prevent their
commission or he did not take the sanctions warranted by the acts committed or he did not
refer the matter to the competent authorities for the purposes of investigation.

Art.291

‐ The order, even if not carried out, to commit one of the offences provided for in this
title, is punished by the same penalties as the completed offence.
The order of a superior, military or civilian, or of the Government cannot exonerate
the perpetrator of an offence referred to in this title from his responsibility, unless the following three conditions
are met:
• a) the perpetrator of the offence was under a legal obligation to obey the orders of the
Government or the superior concerned;
• b) the perpetrator of the offence did not know that the order was unlawful;
• c) the order was not manifestly unlawful.
73

For the purposes of applying the provisions of this title, the order to commit one of the
offences referred to therein is always deemed manifestly unlawful.

Art.295

‐ Public prosecution relating to the offences provided for in this title as well as the sentences
pronounced are not subject to any statute of limitations.

Title 2 ‐ Genocide

Art.296

‐ Is guilty of genocide and is punished by life imprisonment anyone who, with
the intent to destroy, in whole or in part, a national, ethnical, racial, or religious group, or a
group determined on the basis of any other arbitrary criterion, commits against members of that
group, any of the following acts:
• a) assassination;
• b) murder;
• e) causing serious bodily or mental harm;
• d) deliberately inflicting on the group conditions of life calculated to bring about its
physical destruction in whole or in part;
• e) imposing measures intended to prevent births within the group;
• f) forcibly transferring children of the group to another group.

Art.297

‐ A military commander, a person effectively acting as a military commander or any
other superior is responsible for the offences provided for in this title, committed by
subordinates under his authority and effective control, to the extent that the
superior knew or should have, owing to the circumstances, known that those subordinates
were committing or were about to commit such offences and for which he did not take all
reasonable necessary measures within his power to prevent their
commission or he did not take the sanctions warranted by the acts committed or he did not
refer the matter to the competent authorities for the purposes of investigation.

Art.298

‐ The order, even if not carried out, to commit one of the offences provided for in this
title is punished with the same penalties as the completed offence.
The order of a hierarchical superior, military or civil, or of the Government cannot exonerate from
liability the perpetrator of an offence referred to in this title, unless the following three conditions
are met:
• a) the perpetrator of the offence had a legal obligation to obey the orders of the
Government or the hierarchical superior concerned;
• b) the perpetrator of the offence was unaware of the unlawful nature of the order;
• c) the order was not manifestly unlawful.
For the purposes of applying the provisions of this title, the order to commit one of the
offences referred to therein is always deemed manifestly unlawful.

Art.299

‐ The public prosecution relating to the offences provided for in this title as well as the penalties
imposed are not subject to any statute of limitations.
74

Titre 3 ‐ Violations of international Treaties on weapons

Art.300.‐ 1°) Shall be punished with imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of

5,000,000 to 15,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties anyone who:
• a) develops, manufactures, acquires, stockpiles or retains chemical weapons or transfers,
directly or indirectly, chemical weapons to anyone;
• b) uses chemical weapons;
• c) undertakes any military preparations whatsoever for the use of chemical weapons;
• d) uses riot control agents as a method of warfare;
• e) possesses a chemical weapons production facility, constructs a new chemical weapons
facility or modifies an existing facility to convert it into a chemical weapons production
facility;
• f) on the territory of a State that is not a party to the Convention, manufactures, acquires, retains,
uses or transfers (on the territory of that State) a Schedule 1 chemical;
• g) manufactures, acquires, retains, uses or transfers (on Chadian territory) a Schedule 1
chemical;
• h) exports a Schedule 1 chemical, previously imported into Chad, to a third State;
• i) unlawfully exports to, or unlawfully imports from a State not party to the Convention
a Schedule 1 or 2 chemical;
• j) unlawfully exports a Schedule 3 chemical to a State not party to the
Convention.
The penalty imposed shall be imprisonment of twenty to thirty years if the acts referred to above have
resulted in death.
2°) The offences mentioned in 1° above committed outside Chadian territory
are deemed to have been committed on Chadian territory and Chadian courts have
jurisdiction to try them if they are committed by a citizen of Chad, by a legal
person incorporated under the laws of Chad or in any place under the control of the Chadian
State.
3°) For the purposes of this article the following are meant by:
"Chemical weapons": the following, together or separately:
• a) toxic chemicals and their precursors, except where intended for purposes not prohibited by the Convention, as long as the types and
quantities involved are consistent with such purposes;
• b) munitions and devices specifically designed to cause death or other
harm through the toxic action of toxic chemicals, as defined in paragraph a, which
would be released as a result of the use of such munitions and devices;
• c) any equipment specifically designed for use in direct connection with the use of
munitions and devices defined in paragraph b.
75

"Convention": the Convention on the Prohibition of the Development, Production, Stockpiling and
Use of Chemical Weapons and on their Destruction of 13 February 1993;
"Toxic chemicals": any chemical which through its chemical action on biological
processes can cause death, temporary incapacity or permanent harm to humans or animals. This includes all chemicals
of this type, whatever their origin, method of production, whether they are obtained in
facilities, in munitions or elsewhere;
"Schedule 1": Schedule 1 appearing in the Annex to the Convention;
"Schedule 2": Schedule 2 appearing in the Annex to the Convention;
"Schedule 3": Schedule 3 appearing in the Annex to the Convention.

Art.301

‐ 1°) Shall be punished with imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of 5,000,000
to 15,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties anyone who engages in:
• a) illicit trafficking in small arms and light weapons, their ammunition and all parts and
components that can be used for their manufacture, repair and assembly;
• b) illicit manufacture of small arms and light weapons, their ammunition and all
parts and components that can be used for their manufacture, repair and assembly;
• c) illicit possession and use of small arms and light weapons, their ammunition and
all parts and components that can be used for their manufacture, repair and assembly
;
• d) illicit falsification or erasure, illicit removal or alteration of the markings
of small arms and light weapons, their ammunition and all parts and
components that can be used for their manufacture, repair and assembly;
• e) any activity carried out in violation of an embargo on small arms and light weapons,
imposed by the United Nations, the African Union, the Economic
Community of Central African States or any other relevant organization.
2°) For the purposes of this article the following are meant by:
"Small arms", individual weapons, including but not limited to: revolvers and automatic or semi-automatic pistols; rifles and carbines, submachine guns, assault rifles and light machine guns.
"Light weapons", crew-served weapons designed to be used by other persons
although some may be carried and used by a single person, including
but not limited to: heavy machine guns, portable removable or mounted grenade launchers, portable anti-aircraft guns, portable anti-tank guns, portable anti-aircraft missile launchers and mortars of a calibre less than 100 mm.
76

Titre 4 ‐ Offences against life and bodily integrity

Chapitre 1 ‐ Intentional offences against life Art.302.‐

Homicide committed intentionally is qualified as murder.
The perpetrator of murder shall be punished with imprisonment of fifteen to thirty years. Murder
shall carry life imprisonment, when it:
• a) preceded, accompanied or followed another crime;
• b) had as its object either to prepare, facilitate or execute an offence, or to facilitate the flight or
ensure the impunity of the perpetrators or accomplices of that offence.

Art.303

‐ Any murder committed with premeditation or lying in wait is an assassination. Any
perpetrator of assassination shall be punished with the penalty of life imprisonment.

Art.304

‐ Shall be punished as perpetrators of assassination all wrongdoers, whatever their
designation, who, in the execution of their crimes, employ torture or commit
acts of barbarity.

Art.305

‐ The murder of legitimate, natural or adoptive fathers or mothers or
any other legitimate ascendant is qualified as parricide.
The perpetrator of parricide shall be punished with the penalty of life imprisonment.

Art.306

‐ Poisoning is defined as any attack on the life of a person by means of
substances that can cause death more or less promptly, in whatever manner
these substances have been used or administered and whatever the consequences.
The perpetrator of poisoning shall be punished by life imprisonment.

Chapitre 2 ‐ Voluntary attacks on bodily integrity

Art.307

‐ Any individual who has voluntarily struck blows or inflicted injuries or committed
any other violence or assault on the person of another and caused their death, without intention
to cause it, shall be punished by imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of 50,000 to
500,000 FCFA.
Where there has been premeditation or ambush, the penalty shall be ten to twenty years
imprisonment.
Where the acts have been committed against the legitimate, natural or adoptive father and mother or against any
other legitimate ascendant of the perpetrator, the penalty shall be twenty to thirty years imprisonment.
77

Art.308

‐ Any individual who has voluntarily struck blows or inflicted injuries or committed
any other violence or assault on the person of another and caused mutilation,
amputation or deprivation of the use of a limb, blindness, loss of an eye or other infirmity,
shall be punished by a penalty of four to eight years imprisonment and a fine of 50,000 to
500,000 FCFA.
Where there has been premeditation or ambush, the penalty shall be ten to fifteen years
imprisonment.

Art.309

‐ Any individual who has voluntarily struck blows or inflicted injuries or committed
any other violence or assault on the person of another, if it has resulted in an illness or
incapacity for personal work for more than twenty days, shall be punished by imprisonment of
one to five years and a fine of 10,000 to 100,000 FCFA.
Where there has been premeditation or ambush, the penalty shall be five to ten years
imprisonment.
Where the acts have been committed against the legitimate, natural or adoptive father and mother or against any
other legitimate ascendant of the perpetrator, the penalty of imprisonment shall be twenty to thirty years.

Art.310

‐ Any individual who has voluntarily struck blows or inflicted injuries or committed
any other violence or assault on the person of another, if it has resulted in an illness or
incapacity for personal work equal to or less than twenty days, shall be punished by imprisonment of
one to five years and a fine of 25,000 to 100,000 FCFA.
Where there has been premeditation or ambush, the penalty shall be six months to five years
imprisonment and a fine of 50,000 to 200,000 FCFA.
Where the acts have been committed against the legitimate, natural or adoptive father and mother or against any
other legitimate ascendant of the perpetrator, the penalties shall be doubled.

Art.311

‐ Whoever has caused another person an illness or incapacity for personal work
by voluntarily administering to them, in whatever manner, substances which, without
being of a nature to cause death, are harmful to health, shall be punished by five to ten years
imprisonment and a fine of 50,000 to 500,000 FCFA.
Where the acts have been committed against the legitimate, natural or adoptive father and mother or against any
other legitimate ascendant of the perpetrator, the penalties shall be doubled.

Art.312

‐ For the purposes of this chapter, premeditation consists of the design formed, before
the action, to attack the person of a determined individual, even if this design is
dependent on some circumstance or some condition.

Art.313

‐ For the purposes of this chapter, ambush consists of waiting for more or less time
in one or various places for an individual, either to cause their death, or to exercise on them
acts of violence.
78

Art.314

‐ For the application of articles 302 to 311 above, homicide, violence and
assault are considered to be voluntary even if the intention of the perpetrator is
to reach another person.

Art.315

‐ Articles 307 to 310 inclusive are not applicable to acts accomplished during
a sporting activity, provided that the perpetrator has respected the rules of that sport.

Chapitre 3 ‐ Involuntary attacks on bodily integrity

Art.316

‐ Whoever, through clumsiness, imprudence, inattention, negligence or failure to observe
regulations, has involuntarily committed a homicide or has involuntarily been the
cause of it shall be punished by imprisonment of three months to two years and a fine of 100,000 to
1,000,000 FCFA.

Art.317

‐ Whoever, through clumsiness, imprudence, inattention, negligence or failure to observe
regulations, has caused another person an incapacity for personal work for more than
six days shall be punished by imprisonment of fifteen days to one year and a fine of 50,000 to
500,000 FCFA.

Chapitre 4

‐ Voluntary attacks on the bodily integrity of minors Art.318.‐
Is punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 10,000 to
100,000 FCFA whoever attacks the integrity of the genital organ of a person
of female sex by:
• a) total or partial ablation of the clitoris and or the labia minora;
• b) total ablation of the labia majora and minora followed by total or partial suture or
total or partial narrowing of the vaginal orifice;
• c) perforation, incision or stretching of the clitoris and or the labia, cauterization, introduction
of corrosive substances or plants into the vagina to cause its narrowing or
bleeding;
• d) any other procedure.
The penalty is imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of 50,000 to 500,000 FCFA:
• a) if the death of the victim results from it;
• b) if the perpetrator habitually engages in this practice.
The court also orders the closure of the professional premises and the prohibition from exercising
the profession in case of commission of the acts, either in a medical establishment, or in a
care center, or in the capacity of medical or paramedical personnel.

Art.319.‐ Is punished by imprisonment of two months to one year and a fine of

25,000 to 50,000 FCFA or by only one of these two penalties, whoever uses any procedure
capable of hindering the biological development of any human organ.
79

Art.320

‐ Those who have exposed or caused to be exposed, abandoned or caused to be abandoned a child or an
incapacitated adult unable to protect themselves due to their physical or mental state,
shall for this fact alone, be sentenced to imprisonment of six months to five years and a fine
of 50,000 to 500,000 FCFA.
The penalty is imprisonment of one to ten years and a fine of 10,000 to
500,000 FCFA if the exposure or abandonment has resulted in an illness or incapacity of
more than twenty days or a mutilation, deprivation of the use of a limb, blindness, loss of an
eye or other infirmities.
Where the exposure or abandonment has caused the death of the victim, the penalty shall be
imprisonment of ten to fifteen years.

Chapitre 5 ‐ Failure to render assistance and state of necessity

Art.321

‐ Shall be punished by three months to two years imprisonment, whoever refrains from providing to
a person in danger the assistance that, without risk to themselves or to third parties, they could provide,
either by their personal action, or by summoning help.
Shall be punished by the penalty provided for in paragraph 1 above, any person who, in case of calamity or
public danger, has, without valid reason, refused or neglected to respond to the request for help or to
the requisition for aid made by the qualified public authority.

Art.322

‐ There is no offense when the injuries or violence are justified by the
immediate necessity of avoiding a greater harm to the victim.

This excerpt sits under: Tchad > Livre 4 ‐ Des crimes et délits contre les groupes de personnes et les personnes > Titre 4 ‐ Des atteintes à la vie et à l'intégrité corporelle > Chapitre 1 ‐ Des atteintes volontaires à la vie Art.302.‐

Title 4 ‐ Torture

Art.323

‐ Anyone who causes the death of another person by torture without intent to kill is punished by imprisonment of twenty to thirty years.
The penalty is imprisonment of ten to twenty years when the torture causes the victim permanent deprivation of the use of all or part of a limb, organ or sense.
The penalty is imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of 300,000 to 1,000,000 FCFA when the torture causes the victim an illness or incapacity for work exceeding thirty days.
The penalty is imprisonment of two to five years and a fine of 100,000 to 500,000 FCFA when the torture causes the victim either an illness or incapacity for work equal to or less than thirty days, or mental or moral pain or suffering.
80

The same penalties apply to any public official, traditional authority or any other person acting in an official capacity who tacitly or expressly consents to, orders or commits other acts constituting cruel, inhuman or degrading punishment or treatment that do not constitute acts of torture as defined in this article.
For the purposes of this article, the term "torture":
• a) means any act by which severe pain or suffering, whether physical, mental or moral, is intentionally inflicted on a person by a public official or traditional authority acting in an official capacity or at their instigation or with their express or tacit consent, in particular for the purposes of obtaining from them or a third person information or confessions, punishing them for an act they or a third person has committed or is suspected of having committed, intimidating or coercing them or intimidating or coercing a third person, or for any reason based on discrimination of any kind;
• b) does not apply to pain or suffering arising only from, inherent in or incidental to lawful sanctions.
No exceptional circumstances whatsoever, whether a state of war or a threat of war, internal political instability or any other public emergency, may be invoked as a justification of torture.
An order from a superior officer or a public authority may not be invoked as a justification of torture.
The conditions restricting the application of paragraph 1 of article 10 of this Code are not applicable to torture.

Art.324

‐ Confiscation of property and publication of the judgment may be ordered against public officials guilty of the offences provided for in article 323 above.

Title 5 ‐ Infringements of the liberty and dignity of persons

Art.325

‐ Those who, without order from the constituted authorities and except in cases where the law orders the seizure of suspects, arrest, detain or sequester any persons shall be punished by imprisonment of five to ten years.
Anyone who provides a place to carry out the detention or sequestration shall be subject to the same penalty.
The penalty shall be reduced to imprisonment of two to five years if the perpetrators of the acts mentioned in paragraph 1 above, not yet prosecuted in fact, have released the arrested, sequestered or detained person before the tenth day following that of the arrest, detention or sequestration.
81

Art.326.‐ The penalty shall be imprisonment of twenty to thirty years

• a) when an unlawful arrest has been carried out in false costume, under a false name, or on a false order of the public authority;
• b) if the arrested, detained or sequestered individual has been threatened with death;
• c) if the arrested, detained or sequestered persons have been subjected to bodily torture;
• d) if the sequestration was preceded by an abduction;
• e) if the sequestration was carried out by its perpetrator with a view to obtaining payment of a ransom;
• f) or when any person seizes another or detains them and threatens to kill them, injure them or continue to detain them in order to compel a State, an international or intergovernmental organization, a natural or legal person or a group of persons, to do or abstain from doing any act as an explicit or implicit condition for the release of the hostage.

Art.327

‐ Anyone who, to satisfy their personal interest, imposes on another person work or a service for which they have not offered themselves of their own free will is punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 50,000 to 500,000 FCFA or by only one of these two penalties.

Art.328

‐ Anyone who deprives a person of their liberty and exercises over them one or more of the attributes inherent in the right of ownership is punished by imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of 100,000 to 5,000,000 FCFA.

Art.329

‐ Anyone who facilitates or ensures the movement of a person in order to obtain, directly or indirectly, a financial advantage or any other material advantage, whatever its nature, is punished by imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of 100,000 to 5,000,000 FCFA.

Art.330

‐ Anyone who, with a view to trafficking a person, proceeds with their recruitment, transfer, accommodation or reception is punished by imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of 100,000 to 5,000,000 FCFA.

Art.331

‐ The penalties provided for in articles 327, 328, 329 and 330 above are doubled:
• a) in case of threats, use of force or other forms of coercion, abduction, fraud, deception, abuse of authority or taking advantage of a situation of vulnerability or exploitation;
• b) when the perpetrator of the acts is a person called upon, by virtue of their functions, to participate in the fight against slavery, trafficking, pledging and trade in persons or in the maintenance of peace;
• c) when the offence is committed by an organized gang or by a criminal association;
• d) when the offence is committed with the use of a weapon;
• e) when the victim has suffered injuries as defined in article 307 of this Code or when they have died as a result of acts related to these facts.
82

Art.332

‐ The perpetrators, co-perpetrators and accomplices of the offences of slavery, trafficking, pledging and trade in persons are, in addition, sentenced to the complementary penalties provided for by article 28 of this Code.

Art.333

‐ Independently of the criminal liability of their directors, legal persons may be declared criminally liable and sentenced to the fines provided for in articles 328 to 330 above, when the offences have been committed by said directors, acting in the exercise of or on the occasion of their functions.

Art.334

‐ The sale or purchase, in whatever form, of bones of a person deceased for more than one year constitutes trafficking in human remains.
Anyone who engages in trafficking in human remains is punished by imprisonment of two to five years and a fine of 5,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA.

Art.335

‐ Shall be considered a procurer and punished by imprisonment of six months to two years
and a fine of 100,000 to 1,000,000 FCFA any person who:
• a) in any manner whatsoever, knowingly aids, assists or protects the prostitution of another or
soliciting for the purpose of prostitution;
• b) in any form whatsoever, shares the proceeds of the prostitution of another or receives
subsidies from a person habitually engaging in prostitution;
• c) knowingly living with a person habitually engaging in prostitution, cannot
justify sufficient resources to enable them to provide alone for their own
existence;
• d) recruits, induces or maintains, even with their consent, a person even
of legal age, for the purpose of prostitution, or delivers them to prostitution or debauchery;
• e) acts as an intermediary, in any capacity whatsoever, between persons engaging in prostitution
or debauchery and individuals who exploit or remunerate the prostitution or
debauchery of another.

Art.336

‐ The penalty shall be imprisonment of two to five years and a fine of
100,000 to 2,000,000 FCFA in cases where:
• a) the offense was committed against a minor;
• b) the offense was accompanied by coercion, abuse of authority or rape;
• c) the perpetrator of the offense was carrying a visible or concealed weapon;
• d) the perpetrator of the offense is the spouse, father, mother or guardian of the victim, teacher or paid servant of the victim or in any capacity whatsoever has authority over them;
• e) the perpetrator of the offense is called upon to participate, by virtue of their functions, in combating prostitution,
protecting health or maintaining public order.
83

Titre 6 ‐ Offenses against the tranquility and honor of persons

Chapitre 1 ‐ Violations of domicile

Art.337

‐ Any official of the administrative or judicial order, any officer or agent of police,
any commander or agent of the public force, who, acting in their capacity, enters the
domicile of a citizen against their will, outside the cases provided for by law, and without the formalities
it has prescribed, shall be punished by imprisonment of six days to one year and a fine of
50,000 to 500,000 FCFA.
Any individual who enters by means of threats or violence the domicile of a
citizen shall be punished by imprisonment of six days to six months and a fine of 25,000 to
100,000 FCFA.

Chapitre 2 ‐ Interference with correspondence

Art.338

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of fifteen days to one year and a fine of
10,000 to 100,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties anyone who, without
the authorization of the addressee, suppresses or opens the correspondence of another.
This article is not applicable to spouses or to father, mother, guardian or customary guardian
with regard to minor children who are not emancipated and for whom they have responsibility.

Chapitre 3 ‐ Threats

Art.339

‐ Anyone who threatens another, by anonymous or signed writing, image, symbol or emblem,
with assassination, poisoning or any other attack against persons provided for by
articles 302, 308, 309 and 310 of this Code shall, whether or not the threat was made with
an order to deposit a sum of money in an indicated place, or to fulfill any other condition,
be punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 50,000 to 500,000 FCFA.

Art.340

‐ Anyone who, by one of the means provided for in the preceding articles, threatens another with
assault or violence not provided for by the preceding article, whether or not the threat was made with
an order or under condition, shall be punished by imprisonment of six days to six months and a fine
of 25,000 to 100,000 FCFA.
If the threat was verbal, the offender shall be punished by imprisonment of six months to two years and
a fine of 10,000 to 100,000 FCFA.
84

Chapitre 4 ‐ Sexual harassment and degrading treatment

Art.341

‐ Commits the offense of sexual harassment and is punished by imprisonment of six months to two
years and a fine of 100,000 to 1,000,000 FCFA, anyone who imposes on a person, in a
repeated manner, remarks or behavior with sexual connotations which either infringe upon their
dignity by reason of their degrading or humiliating character, or create against them an
intimidating, hostile or offensive situation.
Is assimilated to sexual harassment the act, even if not repeated, of using any form of serious pressure
with the real or apparent aim of obtaining an act of a sexual nature, whether it is
sought for the benefit of the perpetrator of the acts or for the benefit of a third party.
The penalties are imprisonment of one to three years and a fine of 200,000 to 2,000,000
FCFA or only one of these two penalties, if the acts are committed:
• a) by a person who abuses the authority conferred upon them by their functions;
• b) against a person under the age of eighteen years;
• c) against a particularly vulnerable person, by reason of an illness, an infirmity,
a physical or psychological deficiency or the state of pregnancy, when this situation is
known to the perpetrator of the acts or is apparent;
• d) against a particularly vulnerable or dependent person by reason of the precariousness of
their economic or social situation, known to the perpetrator of the acts or apparent;
• e) by several persons acting in co-action or when one is the perpetrator and the other
an accomplice.

Art.342

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of six months to three years and a fine of
20,000 to 200,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties anyone who:
• a) in any manner whatsoever, without infringing upon the physical integrity of their spouse or
a person, subjects said spouse or said person to degrading, humiliating or inhuman treatment
of a nature to cause them psychological disturbance, trauma or
mental affliction;
• b) exercises violence of the same nature against their spouse, their cohabitant, a relative or a relation by marriage.
The same penalties are applicable when the acts of violence are committed against
persons other than those referred to in paragraph 1 above, with a view to psychologically affecting
those who are referred to therein.
The penalties referred to in paragraph 1 are doubled when the acts are:
• a) committed against a pregnant woman;
• b) committed in the context of widowhood rites, against a widower or against a widow;
• c) accompanied by deprivation of food, destruction or confiscation of the
personal effects of the victim;
• d) accompanied by deprivation of any other right or any prerogative linked to the status of the
victim.
85

Chapitre 5 ‐ False accusation

Art.343

‐ Anyone who, by any means whatsoever, makes a false accusation
against one or more individuals to officers of justice or of administrative or
judicial police, or to any authority having the power to act upon it or to refer the matter to the competent authority,
or even to the hierarchical superiors or to the employers of the accused, shall be punished by imprisonment of six months to five years and a fine of
50,000 to 500,000 FCFA.
If the reported fact is liable to penal or disciplinary sanction, proceedings may
be instituted under this article either after judgment or decision of acquittal or
dismissal or after order or decision of no case to answer, or after dismissal of the accusation by
the magistrate, official, superior authority or employer competent to give it the
action it was capable of entailing.
The court seized under this article shall be required to stay proceedings if proceedings
concerning the reported fact are pending.

Chapitre 6

‐ Defamation and insult committed otherwise than through the press

This excerpt sits under: Tchad > Livre 4 ‐ Crimes and offenses against groups of persons and persons > Titre 5 ‐ Offenses against the liberty and dignity of persons

Art.344

‐ Is punished by a fine of 50,000 to 1,000,000 FCFA anyone who, outside the channels
provided by texts relating to the press, whether by gestures, words or cries uttered in public
or in places open to the public, damages the honor or reputation of a person
by imputing to them directly or indirectly facts of which they cannot provide proof.
The truth of the imputation may be proven except:
• a) when it concerns the private life of the victim;
• b) when it refers to a fact going back more than ten years;
• c) when it refers to a fact constituting an amnestied offense or to a fact having been
the subject of a conviction otherwise erased.
Prosecution may only be initiated upon complaint by the victim or their legal representative.
Until final conviction, withdrawal of the complaint stops the exercise of public prosecution.
This article is applicable to defamation directed against the memory of a deceased person when
the author of the defamation intended to damage the honor or reputation of the
heirs, spouse or universal legatees still living.
The penalties are reduced by half if the defamation is not public.

Art.345

‐ Do not constitute the offense of defamation, without prejudice to
the application of legal provisions relating to the press:
86

• a) speeches made within the National Assembly as well as reports or any other document
printed by order of the National Assembly;
• b) the report of public sessions of the National Assembly made in good faith;
• c) judicial debates, speeches delivered or writings produced before the
courts;
• d) the faithful and good faith report of these debates and speeches, with the exception of defamation trials;
• e) the publication of judicial decisions, including those rendered in matters of
defamation;
• f) the official report made in good faith by a person duly designated to conduct
an investigation and within the framework of that investigation;
• g) the imputation made in good faith by a hierarchical superior about their subordinate;
• h) information given in good faith about a person to a third party who has a personal
or official interest in knowing it or who has the power to remedy an alleged injustice;
• i) criticism of a work, a performance, an opinion of any kind publicly expressed,
provided that said criticism does not reflect personal animosity;
• j) historical work done in good faith.

Art.346

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of fifteen days to six months and a fine of
25,000 to 50,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties anyone who, outside the
channels provided by texts relating to the press, whether by gestures, words or cries uttered in
places open to the public and without having been provoked, uses against a person
an insulting expression, a gesture, a term of contempt or an invective that does not contain
the imputation of any fact.
Prosecution may only be initiated upon complaint by the victim or their legal representative.
Until final conviction, withdrawal of the complaint stops the exercise of public prosecution.
This article is applicable to insult made to the memory of a deceased person.

Chapitre 7 ‐ Des extorsions

Art.347

‐ Anyone who has extorted or attempted to extort by force, violence or constraint, the
signature or delivery of a writing, an act, a title, any document whatsoever, containing or
effecting an obligation, disposition or discharge, shall be punished by imprisonment of two to ten years.

Art.348

‐ Anyone who, by means of threat, written or verbal, of revelations or imputations
defamatory in nature, has extorted or attempted to extort, either the delivery of funds or securities, or the signature
or delivery of the writings enumerated above, shall be punished, for blackmail, by imprisonment of
one to five years and a fine of 100,000 to
1,000,000 FCFA.
87

Titre 7 ‐ Des offenses sexuelles

Chapitre 1 ‐ Du viol

Art.349

‐ Constitutes rape, and punished by eight to fifteen years, any act of sexual penetration, of
whatever nature, committed on the person of another by violence, constraint, threat or
surprise.
Attempted rape is punished by the same penalty provided in paragraph 1 above.

Art.350.‐ The penalty is imprisonment of ten to twenty years when the rape

• a) has resulted in mutilation or permanent disability;
• b) has been committed on a minor under eighteen years of age;
• c) has been committed on a particularly vulnerable person due to illness,
infirmity, physical or mental deficiency or pregnancy and that this
state is apparent or known to the perpetrator of the acts;
• d) has been committed by an ascendant or by any other person having over the victim an authority
of law or of fact;
• e) has been committed by a person who abuses the authority conferred by their functions;
• f) has been committed by several persons acting in co-action or one as perpetrator and the other
as accomplice;
• g) has been committed with use or threat of a weapon;
• h) has been committed through contact of the victim with the perpetrator of the acts and by
the use, for the dissemination of messages intended for an undetermined public, of an
electronic communication network;
• i) has been committed because of the sexual orientation of the victim;
• j) has been committed in conjunction with one or more other rapes committed on other victims;
• k) has been committed by a person acting in a state of intoxication or under the influence of
narcotic drugs;
• l) the penalty is imprisonment of fifteen to twenty years if the rape was preceded,
accompanied or followed by acts of torture.
The penalty is imprisonment of twenty to thirty years when the rape has resulted in the death of the victim.
In the cases provided for in points d) and e) above, the court may deprive the convicted person of
parental authority and of any possibility of being a guardian or curator for a period of ten years.
88

Chapitre 2 ‐ Des autres atteintes à la pudeur

Art.351

‐ Any exhibition of a nature to offend decency, made publicly or in the presence of
involuntary witnesses, is a public outrage to decency and is punished by imprisonment of
three months to two years and a fine of 10,000 to 100,000 FCFA.

Art.352

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of one to five years, anyone who engages in sexual relations
with an animal or on a corpse.
Is punished by imprisonment of five to ten years, anyone who, by means of physical
or psychological violence, compels a person to engage in the practices referred to in the preceding paragraph.

Art.353

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 50,000 to
500,000 FCFA, anyone who has sexual relations with their brother or sister legitimate, natural,
full, consanguineous or uterine.
Is punished by the same penalty, anyone who has sexual relations with their brother-in-law or sister-in-law,
their son or daughter, the son or daughter of their brother or sister, their mother or father.
The penalties are doubled when the offender is aided by one or more other persons.
Is punished by imprisonment of five to ten years anyone who, by means of physical or
psychological violence, compels a person to have sexual relations with their collaterals referred to in
paragraph I of this article.

Art.354

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of three months to two years and a fine of
50,000 to 500,000 FCFA, anyone who has sexual relations with persons of their own sex.

Title 8 ‐ Offences against the person or status of the child

Chapter 1 ‐ Infanticide

Art.355.‐ Infanticide is the murder or assassination of a newborn child

The mother, principal perpetrator or accomplice in the assassination or murder of her newborn child
shall be punished by imprisonment of five to ten years, without this provision being
applicable to her co-perpetrators or accomplices.
89

Chapter 2 ‐ Abortion

Art.356

‐ Whoever, by food, beverages, medication, manoeuvres, violence or by any
other means shall have procured or attempted to procure the abortion of a pregnant woman or
woman supposed to be pregnant, whether she consented or not, shall be punished by imprisonment of one to five
years and a fine of 50,000 to 500,000 FCFA.
The imprisonment shall be five to ten years and the fine 100,000 to 1,000,000 FCFA, if it is established
that the offender has habitually engaged in the acts referred to in the preceding paragraph.
Shall be punished by imprisonment of two months to two years and a fine of 25,000 to
50,000 FCFA, the woman who shall have procured an abortion for herself or shall have attempted to procure it for herself,
or who shall have consented to use the means indicated to her or administered to her for that purpose.
Doctors, midwives, dental surgeons, pharmacists, as well as medical students, pharmacy students or employees, herbalists, bandage makers, dealers
in surgical instruments, nurses, masseurs, who shall have indicated, facilitated or practised the
means of procuring abortion, shall be sentenced to the penalties provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 of
this article.
Suspension for at least five years and absolute incapacity to practise their profession
shall, in addition, be pronounced against the offenders.
Whoever contravenes the prohibition to practise his profession pronounced pursuant to the
preceding paragraph, shall be punished by imprisonment of six months to two years or a fine of
100,000 to 1,000,000 FCFA.

Art.357

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of 100,000 to
2,000,000 FCFA, whoever, by violence against a pregnant woman or against the unborn child, causes, even unintentionally, the death or permanent incapacity of
the child.

Art.358

‐ The provisions of the two preceding articles are not applicable if the acts are
performed by an authorized person and are justified by the necessity to save the mother from a
serious danger to her health.
Medicalized abortion is authorized in case of sexual assault, rape, incest or when the
pregnancy endangers the mental or physical health or life of the mother or that of the foetus.
Authorization to abort is issued by the Public Prosecutor after attestation by a doctor
of the materiality of the facts.
90

Chapter 3 ‐ Sexual offences committed against minors

Art.353

‐ Commits a sexual assault and shall be punished by two to ten years' imprisonment,
whoever without violence, maintains a sexual relationship or practises touching of
a sexual nature on the person of a child of either sex under the age of thirteen.
When the assault shall have been consummated or attempted with violence, it shall be punished by the penalties for rape.

Art.360

‐ Shall be punished by imprisonment of one to three years and a fine of 100,000 to 500,000
FCFA, whoever, without violence, maintains a sexual relationship or practises touching
of a sexual nature on a person of his sex under the age of eighteen.

Art.361

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of two to five years and a fine of 25,000 to 200,000
FCFA, whoever commits an indecent act in the presence of a minor person under
sixteen years of age.
The penalties provided for in paragraph 1 above are doubled if the indecent act is committed with violence or
if the perpetrator is:
• a) a person having authority over the victim or having legal custody of the victim;
• b) a public official or a Minister of religion;
• c) a person assisted by several others.
In all cases, the court may deprive the convicted person of parental authority and of any
possibility of being a guardian or curator for a period of ten years.

Art.362

‐ Constitute child pornography, the production, distribution,
dissemination, importation, exportation, offering, making available, sale, obtaining or
handing over to another, possession of any material representing by any means whatsoever, a
child engaging in explicit sexual activities, real or simulated, or representing the
sexual organs of a child.
Child pornography is punished by imprisonment of one to four years and a
fine of 100,000 to 500,000 FCFA.

Art.363

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 25,000 to
1,000,000 FCFA, whoever incites, encourages or facilitates the debauchery of a person who has not
reached the age of majority.
The penalties provided for in paragraph 1 above are doubled if the victim is under the age of sixteen.
The court may in addition pronounce the complementary penalties provided for in Article 28 of this
Code.
91

Art.364

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of fifteen days to six months and a fine of
25,000 to 100,000 FCFA, whoever, having legal or customary custody of a child under
eighteen years of age, allows him to reside in a house or establishment where
prostitution is practised or to work there or to work as an employee for a prostitute.

Chapter 4 ‐ Offences in relation to the status and civil status of the child

Art.365

‐ Those guilty of acts tending to compromise the civil status of a child, shall be punished by
imprisonment of five to ten years.

Art.366.‐ Those guilty of substitution of one child for another shall be punished by

imprisonment of two to ten years, without prejudice to the penalties provided for forgery if applicable.
If it is established that the child is not living or viable, the penalty shall be six months to five years'
imprisonment.

Art.367

‐ Those guilty of falsely attributing a child to a woman who has not given birth,
shall be punished by imprisonment of two to ten years without prejudice to the penalties provided for
forgery if applicable.

Art.368

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of 500,000 to
5,000,000 FCFA, whoever:
• a) compels by any means whatsoever, celebrates or gives his authorization to the
celebration of the marriage of a person of either sex who has not yet reached the legal
age of marriage or compels such a person to marry;
• b) marries a person who has not yet reached the legal age of marriage.
The court may, in addition, deprive the convicted person of parental authority and of any possibility
of being a guardian or curator for a period of ten years.

Art.369

‐ Is punished by a fine of 50,000 to 500,000 FCFA, the parent who refuses to enrol
his child in school.
Is punished by the penalties provided for in paragraph 1 above:
• a) the head of an educational establishment or training school who refuses to recruit
a pupil on grounds of pregnancy or to reinstate her in the school cycle after
childbirth;
• b) the head of an educational establishment or training school who exercises psychological violence against a pregnant pupil or against the pupil who is the author of a pregnancy, excludes them from
the establishment on grounds of the pregnancy or compels them for this sole reason, to repeat
a class.
In case of recidivism, the perpetrator of the offence is liable to a penalty of imprisonment of one to two
years.
92

Art.370

‐ Whoever shall have facilitated the enrolment or use of children in forces or
armed groups as well as their use in wars and armed conflicts, shall be punished by
imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of 1,000,000 to
10,000,000 FCFA.

Chapter 5 ‐ Abduction of minors

Art.371

‐ Commits the offence of abduction of a minor and is punished by imprisonment of five to ten
years and a fine of 40,000 to 400,000 FCFA, whoever, without fraud or violence, abducts,
leads away or diverts a minor person under fifteen years of age against the will of those
to whom their legal or customary custody belongs.
The imprisonment is ten to fifteen years when the abduction was committed with violence.

Art.372

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of 25,000 to
200,000 FCFA whoever, by fraud or violence, abducts, leads away or diverts a person
over fifteen years of age who has not yet reached civil majority, even if he believes them to be older, against
the will of those to whom their legal or customary custody belongs.

Art.373

‐ The acts provided for in the two preceding articles are punished by imprisonment of twenty to
thirty years:
• a) if the victim is a minor person under thirteen years of age;
• b) if the perpetrator's purpose is to be paid a ransom or has been paid one;
• c) when the death of the minor victim results therefrom.

Art.374.‐ Is punished by imprisonment of one month to two years and a fine of

50,000 to 500,000 FCFA, when a decision has been made on the custody of a minor by court decision,
provisional or final, the father, mother or any person who does not return this minor to
those who have the right to claim them or who, even without fraud or violence, abducts them,
diverts them or has them abducted or diverted from the hands of those to whom their custody has been entrusted
or from the places where the latter have placed them.

Art.375

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of six months to one year and a fine of 50,000 to 500,000
FCFA or only one of these two penalties, whoever obstructs the exercise by a parent of
the right of visit granted to them by a court decision concerning the common child or children.

Chapter 6 ‐ Access of minors to drinking establishments

Art.376

‐ Is punished by a fine of 50,000 to 500,000 FCFA, the seller of alcoholic
beverages who admits into their establishment a minor person under sixteen years of age not
accompanied by a person having their supervision and having already reached civil majority.
93

Art.377

‐ Is punished by the penalty provided for in the preceding article, the seller of beverages who sells or
offers in their establishment or in any other public place alcoholic beverages to a minor
person under eighteen years of age and not accompanied by a person having their supervision and
having already reached civil majority.

Art.378

‐ Is punished by the same penalty, whoever gives drink to the point of intoxication to a person
who has not yet reached civil majority.

Art.379

‐ In case of recidivism, the perpetrators of the offences provided for in articles 376 to 378 above
are punished by imprisonment of fifteen days to one month and a fine of 10,000 to 100,000
FCFA.
The court may in addition:
• a) order against the convicted seller, the closure of their establishment under the
conditions provided for in article 33 of this Code;
• b) order the publication of its decision;
• c) order the complementary penalties of article 28 of this Code.

Art.380

‐ Articles 376 to 378 above are not applicable to whoever proves that they were
misled about the age of the minor or about the age or capacity of the person accompanying them.

Chapter 7 ‐ Crimes and offences against the family

Paragraph 1 ‐ Attacks on the status of persons, abductions, concealment,

suppressions, substitution, non-return of children

Art.381

‐ Those guilty of abductions, concealment, suppression of a child, tending to
compromise their civil status, shall be punished by hard labour for a fixed term.

Art.382

‐ Those who, having been entrusted with a child, do not return them to the persons responsible for
claiming them, shall be punished by the penalties provided for in the preceding article.

Paragraph 2 ‐ Attacks on family authority

Section 1 ‐ Abductions and diversions of minors

Art.383

‐ Whoever, without fraud or violence, has abducted or diverted, or attempted to abduct or
divert a minor of fifteen years, shall be punished by imprisonment of two to five years and a
fine of 25,000 to 100,000 FCFA.
When a minor female thus abducted or diverted has married her abductor, the latter may not
be prosecuted except upon complaint of the persons who have standing to request
94

the annulment of the marriage and may not be convicted until after this annulment has been
pronounced.

Art.384

‐ Whoever has, by fraud or violence, abducted, or had abducted minors, or has
had them led away, diverted or displaced from the places where they were placed by those to whose authority or
direction they were subject or entrusted, shall undergo the penalty of imprisonment of five to
ten years.
The attempt of the offence provided for in this article shall be punished as the offence.

Paragraph 3 ‐ Attacks on the integrity and unity of the family

Section 1 ‐ Adultery

Art.385

‐ Adultery is punished by imprisonment of two to six months and a fine of 50,000
to 500,000 FCFA.
The accomplice to adultery shall be punished by the same penalties.

Art.386

‐ Prosecutions may be brought only upon complaint of the offended spouse and shall be
stopped by their withdrawal.
Spouses guilty of adultery may not file a complaint against each other.

Art.387

‐ Only flagrante delicto and letters, photos and other written evidence
emanating from the person against whom they are opposed shall be admitted as evidence of the offences specified in the preceding article.

Section 2 ‐ Abandonment of family

Art.388

‐ Shall be punished by imprisonment of one month to one year, any person who, in
disregard of an order or judgment having condemned them to pay subsidies
or maintenance to their spouse, ascendants or descendants, has
voluntarily remained more than two months without providing all of the subsidies or paying the
full amount of the maintenance.
The failure to pay is presumed voluntary. Proof to the contrary may not be drawn from
insolvency resulting from the laziness, drunkenness, habitual misconduct, idleness
or voluntary impoverishment of the debtor.
The competent court is that of the place of domicile or residence of the creditor.
95

Title 8 ‐ Attacks on the confidence of third parties

Art.389

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 50,000 to
500,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties, whoever abuses a blank signature that
is entrusted to them to fraudulently write thereon either an obligation, disposition or discharge, or a
mention likely to compromise the person or fortune of the signatory.

Art.390

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of
25,000 to 100,000 FCFA, whoever reveals, without the authorization of the person to whom it belongs, a
confidential fact that they only knew or that was only entrusted to them by reason of their profession or function.
Paragraph I above does not apply either to declarations made to judicial authorities or judicial police
concerning facts likely to constitute a crime or offence, or to responses in
court to any request whatsoever.
Paragraph 2 does not apply:
• to the physician and surgeon who are always bound by professional secrecy, except within the
limit of a legal requisition or expert commission;
• to the civil servant upon written order of the Government;
• to the Minister of religion and the lawyer;
• to the notary within the limit of a legal requisition or expert commission.
The court may, in addition, order the complementary penalties of article 36 of this
Code.

Art.391

‐ Is punished by imprisonment from three months to three years and a fine from
100,000 to 5,000,000 FCFA or by only one of these two penalties, anyone who discloses without
the authorization of the person to whom it belongs an industrial or commercial fact or process of
which he became aware by reason of his employment.
The court may impose the complementary penalties of Article 36 of this Code.

Art.392

‐ Is punished by imprisonment from one to five years and a fine from 100,000 to
10,000,000 FCFA any director, manager, administrator or auditor of a company
who, with the aim of misleading one or more partners, shareholders or creditors, makes a
false declaration or provides a false account.
The court may in addition impose the complementary penalties of Article 36 of this
Code.

Art.393

‐ Is punished by imprisonment from three to eight years and a fine from 100,000 to 1,000,000
FCFA, anyone who counterfeits or falsifies a private writing bearing an obligation, disposition or
discharge either in substance or in signatures, dates or attestations.
96

The penalty is imprisonment from five to ten years and a fine from 200,000 to
2,000,000 FCFA, if it concerns either:
• a) a commercial or banking writing;
• b) a writing attesting to a land right;
• c) a mandate to sign one of the writings referred to in points a and b above;
• d) a will.

Art.394

‐ Is punished by imprisonment from three to eight years and a fine from 100,000 to 1,000,000
FCFA, anyone who makes use of a counterfeited or falsified private writing bearing an obligation,
disposition or discharge either in substance or in signatures, dates or attestations.
The penalty is imprisonment from five to ten years and a fine from 200,000 to
2,000,000 FCFA if it concerns either:
• a) a commercial or banking writing;
• b) a writing attesting to a land right;
• c) the mandate to sign one of the writings referred to in points a and b;
• d) a will.

Art.395

‐ Is punished by imprisonment from one month to one year, anyone who counterfeits or falsifies a
private certificate or who issues a false certificate not otherwise punished or who makes use of a
counterfeited, falsified or false private certificate.
The penalty provided for in paragraph 1 above is doubled in case of counterfeiting, fabrication or use of a
medical certificate or of a private writing not provided for in Article 394 above.

Livre 5 ‐ Offences against property

Titre 1 ‐ Destructions

Art.396.‐ Is punished by imprisonment from six months to six years and a fine from

100,000 to 300,000 FCFA or by only one of these two penalties, anyone who destroys, even
partially, any property belonging in whole or in part to another or encumbered with a charge in favor
of another.
The penalty is imprisonment from two to ten years and a fine from 200,000 to 1,000,000
FCFA or only one of these two penalties, if the destruction concerns buildings, works,
ships or installations.
Are punished by the penalties provided for in the preceding paragraph, those who have driven or allowed livestock to pass on the land of another, sown or loaded with crops in any season whatsoever.
97

Art.397

‐ Is punished by imprisonment from six months to three years and a fine from
100,000 to 500,000 FCFA, anyone who:
• a) removes or displaces a boundary marker or any other sign established to mark the boundary between different
properties;
• b) destroys a fence of any nature whatsoever.

Art.398

‐ Voluntary arson of inhabited places or places used for habitation is punished by
imprisonment from five to ten years.
If the arson has caused the death of one or more persons, the penalty shall be
imprisonment from twenty to thirty years.
Voluntary arson of buildings, means of transport, all places which are neither inhabited nor
used for habitation, arson of forests, woods or crops standing or cut, when they
do not belong to the perpetrator of the acts, shall be punished by imprisonment from two to five years.
If however the arson has caused the death of one or more persons, the penalty shall be
imprisonment from ten to fifteen years.

Art.399

‐ Voluntary destruction by means of explosive substances of inhabited places or places used for
habitation, constructions, vehicles, public or private roads and generally all
movable or immovable objects, shall be punished by the same penalties and according to the distinctions set forth in
Article 398 above.
The placing, with criminal intent, on a public or private road, of an explosive device
shall be assimilated to attempted murder with premeditation.
Persons guilty of the offences provided for in this article shall be exempt from penalty, if
before the consummation of said offences and before any prosecution, they have given
notice and revealed the perpetrators to the constituted authorities, or if, even after prosecution
has commenced, they have procured the arrest of the other guilty parties.
They may nevertheless be prohibited from residing in certain areas.

Art.400

‐ The threat to commit one of the crimes enumerated in Articles 398, 404 and 399, 405
above shall be punished as a threat of death.

Titre 2 ‐ Fraudulent appropriations

Chapitre 1 ‐ Theft

Art.401

‐ Commits the offence of theft and is punished by six months to five years of imprisonment, anyone who
fraudulently misappropriates a thing which does not belong to him.

Art.402.‐ There is no theft by

98

• a) husbands to the prejudice of their wives;
• b) wives to the prejudice of their husbands;
• c) a widower or a widow as to things which had belonged to the deceased spouse;
• d) children or other descendants to the prejudice of their father or other ascendants;
• e) fathers or mothers or other ascendants to the prejudice of their children or other
descendants;
• f) relatives by marriage in the same degrees, provided that the misappropriations are committed during
the duration of the marriage and outside a period during which the spouses are authorized to
live separately.
Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph I above, any other individual who has concealed or
applied to his own benefit all or objects stolen shall be punished as guilty of receiving stolen goods.

Art.403.‐ The penalty is five to ten years' imprisonment if

• a) the theft was committed at night;
• b) the theft was committed by two or more persons acting together;
• c) the theft was committed with scaling, interior or exterior breaking and entering, in an inhabited place or a place used for habitation;
• d) the theft was committed using a motorized vehicle;
• e) the offenders or one of them assumed the title of a civil or military official or wore the uniform or costume of an official or alleged a false order from civil or military authority or carried any disguise likely to suggest a status or quality that is not theirs;
• f) the theft was committed by a domestic servant or employee, either in the employer's house or in a house where he or she accompanied the employer, or by a worker or apprentice in the house, workshop, or store of his or her employer, or by an individual working habitually, in whatever capacity, in the place where the theft was committed;
• g) an innkeeper, a carrier or one of their agents stole things entrusted to them in that capacity.
The penalty is ten to fifteen years' imprisonment if:
• a) the theft was committed with two or more of the circumstances set out in paragraph 1 above;
• b) the offenders or one of them carried a visible or concealed weapon;
• c) the theft was committed with violence or threats;
• d) the theft was committed using false keys.
Where the violence committed by the perpetrator of the theft has caused incapacity for work of more than twenty days or more serious injuries or infirmities, the penalty shall be imprisonment of fifteen to twenty years.
Where the violence has caused death even without intent to cause it, the penalty shall be imprisonment of twenty to thirty years.
99

Art.404

‐ Breaking and entering is defined as any forcing, breaking, damage, demolition, removal of walls, roofs, floors, doors, windows, locks, padlocks, or anything preventing passage and any kind of enclosure, whatever it may be.

Art.405

‐ An inhabited house is deemed to be any building, dwelling, lodge, cabin, even mobile, which, without being currently inhabited, is intended for habitation and everything dependent on it, such as courtyards, farmyards, barns, stables, buildings enclosed therein, whatever their use, and even if they have a separate enclosure within the general enclosure or perimeter.

Art.406

‐ False keys are defined as all imitated, counterfeited or altered keys, as well as all keys or any instruments whatsoever that were not intended for opening the locks, padlocks or other fastenings to which the offender has used them.
Whoever has counterfeited or altered keys shall be sentenced to imprisonment of three months to two years and a fine of 25,000 to 100,000 FCFA.
If the offender is a locksmith by profession, he or she shall be punished by imprisonment of two to five years and a fine of 25,000 FCFA to 100,000 FCFA.
The penalties provided for in paragraphs 2 and 3 above are fixed without prejudice to heavier penalties, if applicable, in case of complicity in a crime.

Art.407

‐ Commits the offense of theft and is punished by six months to five years' imprisonment whoever:
• a) unlawfully appropriates energy from any motive power;
• b) appropriates a lost thing.

Art.408

‐ In all cases provided for in articles 401 and 403 to 407 above, the complementary penalties provided for by the provisions of article 28 of this Code may be applied.
The attempt of the offenses provided for in articles 401 and 403 is punished as the theft itself.

Chapitre 2 ‐ De l'escroquerie

Art.409

‐ Is punished by one to five years' imprisonment and a fine the maximum rate of which is equal to triple the value delivered, whoever, either by using false names or false qualities, or by employing fraudulent maneuvers to persuade the existence of false enterprises, an imaginary power or credit, or to create hope or fear of success or any other unreal event, has had delivered or issued to himself or herself, or has attempted to have delivered or issued to himself or herself funds, movables or obligations, dispositions, bills, promises, receipts or discharges, and has, by one of these means, obtained by fraud or attempted to obtain by fraud in whole or in part, the property of another.
100

Art.410

‐ Is punished by the penalties sanctioning the offense of fraud, whoever abuses the needs, weaknesses or passions of a person who has not yet reached civil majority to make him or her sign any obligation, disposition or discharge, or any document likely to compromise the person or fortune of the signatory.
For the application of this article, an incapable adult or a person in a state of notorious insanity is assimilated to a minor.

Chapitre 3 ‐ De l'abus de confiance

Art.411

‐ Whoever has misappropriated or dissipated things that had been entrusted to him or her only on condition of returning or producing them, or of making a specific use or employment of them, shall be punished by six months to five years' imprisonment and a fine of 50,000 to 2,000,000 FCFA.
Failure to repay a loan of things or money intended to be consumed does not constitute the offense of breach of trust provided for in the preceding paragraph.

Art.412

‐ If the breach of trust was committed by a public or ministerial officer, the penalty shall be imprisonment of five to ten years.
If the breach of trust was committed by a person appealing to the public to obtain, either on his or her own account or as director, administrator or agent of a company or a commercial or industrial enterprise, the delivery of funds or securities, by way of deposit, mandate or pledge, the duration of imprisonment may be extended to ten years and the fine to 10,000,000 FCFA.
The complementary penalties of article 28 of this Code may, in addition, be applied.

Art.413

‐ Notwithstanding the provisions of paragraph 2 of the preceding article, shall be punished by the penalties for breach of trust any beneficiary of a loan granted by a community or public establishment or by an organization covered by the guarantee of public authorities who has used the loaned sums for purposes or under conditions other than those that were stipulated.
The penalties provided for in the preceding paragraph 1 shall be applied to whoever has disposed, contrary to the stipulations of the contract, of the proceeds of operations for which the loan was granted.

Chapitre 4 ‐ Des autres atteintes aux biens

Art.414

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of fifteen days to six months and a fine of 25,000 to 50,000 FCFA whoever, being unable to pay the price:
• a) has beverages or food served to him or her which he or she has consumed on the premises;
101

• b) occupies a room in a hotel;
• c) rents a motor vehicle;
• d) has fuel or lubricants served for a motor vehicle.
In the cases provided for in points a and b above, the duration of the supply of beverages or food or the occupation of the accommodation must not have exceeded one week.

Art.415

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of 100,000 to 1,000,000 FCFA, the pledgor debtor who knowingly removes, misappropriates or destroys the pledged property.

Art.416

‐ Articles 414 and 415 above are not applicable between spouses, between legitimate or adoptive ascendants and descendants or between natural ascendants and descendants up to the second degree if they live together or are recognized, against the widower or widow regarding necessities that belonged to the deceased spouse.

Art.417

‐ Those who, knowingly, have concealed things removed, diverted or obtained by means of a crime or an offence shall be punished by six months to five years' imprisonment and, in addition, by a fine which may be raised up to half the value of the concealed objects.
In the case where the act which procured the concealed things constitutes a crime, the concealer shall be punished by the penalty attached by law to the crime and to the circumstances of the crime of which he had knowledge at the time of concealment.
The fine provided for by paragraph 1 above may always be pronounced.

Art.418

‐ Is punished by a fine of 25,000 to 1,000,000 FCFA, the lender who demands or receives interest or other remuneration exceeding the rate fixed by law for loans of the same nature.
In case of recidivism, the penalty is imprisonment of fifteen days to one year and the fine is doubled.
The court may order the publication of its decision under the conditions provided for in article 34 of this Code.
For the application of this article, the borrower is not considered an accomplice.

Titre 3 ‐ Infringements of intellectual property

Art.419

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of 500,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA, anyone who improperly exploits a patent for invention.
Is punished by the penalties provided for in paragraph 1 above anyone who conceals, sells, exports, imports or makes use of an object resulting from the improper exploitation of a patent for invention.
102

In the cases provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 above, the court orders the confiscation of the object resulting from the improper exploitation for the benefit of the owner of the patent for invention.
The court orders the publication of its decision under the conditions provided for in article 34 of this Code.

Art.420

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of 500,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA, anyone who improperly exploits a registered design, trademark or industrial model.
Is punished by the penalties provided for in paragraph 1 above, anyone who conceals, sells, exports, imports or makes use of an object resulting from the improper exploitation of a registered design, trademark or industrial model.
In the cases provided for in paragraphs 1 and 2 above, the court orders the confiscation of objects resulting from the improper exploitation of registered designs, trademarks and models, for the benefit of the injured parties.
The court orders the publication of its decision under the conditions provided for in article 34 of this Code.
The convicted person is deprived of the right to be an elector, of the right of eligibility and of any elective or nominative mandate to the consular chambers of commerce or industry for a period of ten years.

Art.421

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of 500,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA, anyone who counterfeits a registered factory or trade mark.
Is punished by the penalties provided for in paragraph 1 above, anyone who conceals, sells, exports, imports or makes use of an object resulting from the counterfeiting of a registered factory or trade mark.
Is punished by the penalties provided for in paragraph 1 above, anyone who:
• a) without counterfeiting a registered mark, has made a fraudulent imitation of it likely to deceive the purchaser;
• b) has made use of a fraudulently imitated mark;
• c) has made any use of a registered mark bearing indications likely to deceive the purchaser as to the nature, substantial qualities, composition or content of useful principles, species or origin of the designated object;
• d) has held without legitimate reason, products which he knew bore a fraudulently imitated mark;
• e) has knowingly sold, offered for sale, supplied or offered to supply products or services under such a mark.
In the cases provided for in paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 above, the court orders the confiscation for the benefit of the injured parties, of objects resulting from the counterfeiting of the factory or trade mark.
103

The court orders the publication of its decision under the conditions provided for in article 34 of this Code.
The convicted person is deprived of the right to be an elector, of the right of eligibility and of any elective or nominative mandate to the consular chambers of commerce or industry for a period of ten years.

Art.422

‐ Are punished by imprisonment of five to ten years, any edition of writing, musical composition, drawing, painting or any other production printed or engraved in whole or in part in defiance of the laws relating to the property of authors, any reproduction, representation or dissemination, any exploitation by any means whatsoever of a work of the mind in violation of the rights of the author.
Is punished by the penalty provided for in paragraph I, the author of an importation or exportation of counterfeit works.
The court seized shall pronounce the confiscation provided for in article 31 of this Code.

Livre 6 ‐ Other crimes and offences

Chapitre 1 ‐ Infringements of public health

Art.423

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of 50,000 to 500,000 FCFA, anyone who either adulterates foodstuffs for human or animal consumption, beverages or medicinal substances, intended to be sold, or holds products solely suitable for carrying out this adulteration.
Is punished by the same penalty, anyone who holds for sale, these foodstuffs, beverages or medicines, either adulterated, or deteriorated, or harmful to human health.
The provisions of this article are not applicable to fresh, fermented or spoiled fruits and vegetables.
The foodstuffs, beverages and medicines, if they still belong to the offender, are confiscated. If they are not used by the administration, their destruction is done at the expense of the convicted person.
The court may order the publication of the decision under the conditions provided for in article 34 of this Code.

Art.424

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of three months to three years and a fine of 50,000 to 500,000 FCFA, anyone who, by his conduct, facilitates the communication of a contagious and dangerous disease.
104

If the facilitated contagion is dangerous to the life of animals normally intended for human consumption, the imprisonment is one to five years.

Art.425

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of fifteen days to six months and a fine of 100,000 to 1,000,000 FCFA or one of these two penalties only, anyone who, by his activity:
• a) pollutes drinking water likely to be used by others;
• b) pollutes the atmosphere to the point of making it harmful to public health.

Art.426.‐ Is punished by imprisonment of two to five years and a fine of

1,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA or one of these two penalties only, any person who offers drinking water to the public without complying with the quality standards in force.
In case of recidivism, the offender incurs double the maximum penalties provided for in the paragraph above.

Art.427

‐ Constitute trafficking in human organs, the sale or purchase of organs of the human body.
Anyone who engages in trafficking in human organs is punished by imprisonment of two to five years and a fine of 5,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA.

Art.428

‐ Is punished by imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of 5,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA or one of these two penalties only, anyone who removes an organ, tissues or cells from a living person for a therapeutic purpose without the consent of that person or of those who have custody of him.
The penalties of paragraph I above are doubled if the removal was carried out against payment in whatever form.

Chapitre 2 ‐ Cybercrime

Section 1 ‐ Infringements of computer systems

Sous‐section 1 ‐ Infringements of the confidentiality and integrity of computer systems

Art.429

‐ Is punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to
10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties, any person who fraudulently accesses or attempts
to access all or part of a computer system.
Is punished by the same penalties anyone who fraudulently obtains or attempts to obtain, for
himself or for another, any advantage whatsoever by entering a computer
system.
105

Art.430

‐ Is punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to
10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties, any person who fraudulently remains
or attempts to remain in all or part of a computer system.
Is punished by the same penalties, any person who obstructs, distorts or attempts to obstruct or distort the
operation of a computer system.
Sub-section 2 ‐ Fraudulent introduction of data into a system

Art.431

‐ Is punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to
10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties, any person who fraudulently introduces or
attempts to introduce data into a computer system.

Section 2 ‐ Offences against computer data

Sub-section 1 ‐ Falsification and use of falsified data

Art.432.‐ Is punishable by imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of

5,000,000 to 50,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties, any person who
fraudulently introduces or attempts to introduce, alters or attempts to alter, erases or attempts to erase, deletes or
attempts to delete computer data, generating non-authentic data, with the intention that they be taken into account or used for legal purposes
as if they were authentic, whether or not they are directly readable and intelligible.

Art.433.‐ Is punishable by imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of

3,000,000 to 30,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties, any person who, with
full knowledge, makes use of data obtained under the conditions set out in
article 429 of this Code.

Art.434

‐ Is punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to
10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties, any person who fraudulently intercepts or
attempts to intercept by technical means, computerized data
during their non-public transmission to, from or within a
computer system.

Art.435

‐ Is punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to
10,000,000 FCFA, or only one of these two penalties, any person who damages
or attempts to damage, erases or attempts to erase, deteriorates or attempts to deteriorate, alters or attempts
to alter, modifies or attempts to fraudulently modify computer data.

Art.436

‐ Is punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to
10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties, any person who produces
106

or manufactures a set of digitized data by the fraudulent introduction, erasure or deletion of computerized data stored, processed or transmitted by a computer
system, generating counterfeit data, with the intention that they be taken into account
or used for legal purposes as if they were original.

Art.437

‐ Is punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to
10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties, any person who fraudulently obtains
for himself or for another, any advantage whatsoever by the introduction,
alteration, erasure or deletion of computerized data or by any form of interference
with the operation of a computer system.

Art.438

‐ Is punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to
10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties, any person who, even through
negligence, carries out or causes to be carried out processing of personal data without
having complied with the formalities prior to their implementation provided for by the law on personal
data.
Sub-section 2 ‐ Misuse of devices

Art.439

‐ Is punishable by imprisonment of one year to three years and a fine of 1,000,000 to
10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties, any person who produces, sells,
imports, possesses, distributes, offers, transfers or makes available:
• a) a device, including a computer program, primarily designed or adapted
to enable the commission of one of the offences referred to in articles 432 to 436
above;
• b) a password, access code or similar computer data enabling
access to all or part of a computer system, with the intention that they be used
in order to commit one or other of the offences referred to in articles 432 to 436 above.
The perpetrators of one of the offences provided for in this article also incur the following
additional penalties:
• a) confiscation, according to the procedures provided for by the texts in force, of any object intended for or
having been used to commit the offence in question, with the exception of objects capable of
restitution;
• b) prohibition, under the conditions provided for by the texts in force, for a period of
five years at least, from exercising a public function or a socio-professional activity,
when the acts were committed in the exercise or on the occasion of the exercise of the functions of the
accused person;
• c) closure, under the conditions provided for by the texts in force, for a period of five years
at least, of the establishments or one or more of the establishments of the enterprise having
been used to commit the incriminated acts;
• d) exclusion for a period of five years at least from public procurement.
107

Sub-section 3 ‐ Digital identity theft, association of computer criminals
and complicity

Art.440

‐ Is punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to
10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties, any person who usurps the digital
identity of a third party or one or more data enabling identification thereof, with a view to disturbing his
peace of mind or that of another or to harm his honour, his reputation or his interests.

Art.441

‐ Is punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to
10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties, any person who participates in
an association formed or an agreement established with a view to preparing or committing one or
more of the offences provided for by this chapter.

Art.442

‐ A person who intentionally commits an act of complicity with a view to the
perpetration of one of the offences provided for in this chapter, with the intention that such
an offence be perpetrated, commits an offence punishable by the same penalties as those
provided for the principal offence.

Section 3 ‐ Content-related offences

Sub-section 1 ‐ Child pornography

Art.443

‐ Is punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to
10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties, any person who produces with a view to its
distribution, attempts to produce with a view to sale, offers, makes available, distributes or attempts to
distribute child pornography through a computer system.

Art.444

‐ Is punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to
10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties, any person who obtains or
obtains for another, imports or causes to be imported, exports or causes to be exported child pornography
through a computer system.

Art.445

‐ Any person who intentionally possesses child pornography in a computer system or in any means of storing computer data shall be punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties.
Any person who facilitates minors' access to images, documents, sound or a representation of a pornographic nature shall be punished by the same penalties.

Art.446

‐ Any person who intentionally proposes, through communication and information technologies, a meeting with a minor child, with the purpose of committing against him or her one of the offences provided for in articles 443 to 445 above, shall be punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties.
When the sexual proposition has been followed by material acts leading to said meeting, the perpetrator commits an aggravated offence punishable by imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of 2,000,000 to 20,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties.

Art.447

‐ For the offences described in articles 443 and 444 above, the complementary penalties provided for in article 28 of this Code may be applied.
Sub-section 2 ‐ Racist and xenophobic acts through a computer system

Art.448

‐ Any person who creates, downloads, disseminates or makes available in any form whatsoever writings, messages, photos, drawings or any other representation of ideas or theories of a racist or xenophobic nature, through a computer system, shall be punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties.

Art.449

‐ Any person who commits threats through a computer system against a person by reason of his or her belonging to a group characterized by race, colour, ancestry, descent or national or ethnic origin, religion, insofar as this belonging serves as a pretext for one or the other of these elements, or a group of persons distinguished by one of these characteristics, shall be punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties.

Art.450

‐ Any person who commits an insult through a computer system against a person by reason of his or her belonging to a group characterized by race, colour, ancestry, descent or national or ethnic origin, religion, insofar as this belonging serves as a pretext for one or the other of these elements, or a group of persons distinguished by one of these characteristics, shall be punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties.

Art.451

‐ Any person who intentionally denies, approves or justifies acts constituting genocide or crimes against humanity through a computer system shall be punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties.

Section 4

‐ Non-execution of injunctions and disclosure of investigation information

Art.452

‐ Any person, other than the person under investigation, who intentionally fails without legitimate excuse or justification to comply with an injunction from judicial police officers or authorized agents, shall be punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties.

Art.453

‐ Any service provider who, having received an injunction, in the context of a criminal investigation, which explicitly stipulated that confidentiality must be maintained or that it results from the law, intentionally without legitimate excuse or justification, discloses information relating to the investigation, shall be punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties.

Art.454

‐ The person legally responsible for the site used to commit the offence or any qualified person responsible for implementing the technical means necessary to guarantee the prohibition of access, hosting or the cutting off of access to the incriminated site and who does not comply with the injunctions issued by the judge to this effect, shall be punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties.

Section 5 ‐ Offences relating to cryptology

Art.455.‐ Any person who has not satisfied the obligation to communicate to the Public Authority in charge of cryptology a description of the technical characteristics of cryptology means in accordance with the texts relating thereto, shall be punished by imprisonment of three months to one year and a fine of 500,000 to 5,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties.

Art.456.‐ Any person who has imported a cryptology means not exclusively providing authentication or integrity control functions without satisfying the obligation of prior declaration to the Authority in charge of cryptology, shall be punished by imprisonment of three months to one year and a fine of 500,000 to 5,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties.

Art.457.‐ Any person who has provided cryptology services without having previously obtained approval from the Public Authority in charge of cryptology, shall be punished by imprisonment of three months to one year and a fine of 500,000 to 5,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties.

Art.458.‐ Any person who has exported a cryptology means not exclusively providing authentication or integrity control functions without having previously obtained authorization from the Public Authority in charge of cryptology, shall be punished by imprisonment of three months to one year and a fine of 500,000 to 5,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties.

Art.459.‐ Any person who has made available to others a cryptology means that has been the subject of a prohibition on use and circulation, shall be punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties.

Art.460.‐ Any person who uses a cryptology means to prepare or commit a crime or an offence or to facilitate the preparation or commission thereof, shall be punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties.

Section 6 ‐ Spamming

Art.461

‐ Any person who, intentionally and without legitimate excuse or justification, shall be punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA or only one of these two penalties:
• a) intentionally triggers the transmission of multiple electronic mails from or through a computer system;
• b) uses a protected computer system to relay or retransmit multiple electronic mails with the intent to deceive or mislead, as to the origin of these messages, the recipients or any provider of electronic mail services or Internet services;
• c) materially falsifies the information found in the headers of electronic messages and intentionally triggers the transmission of the messages.

Chapitre 3

‐ Adaptation of classic offences to information and communication technologies

This excerpt sits under: Tchad > Livre 6 ‐ Des autres crimes et délits > Chapitre 2 ‐ De la cybercriminalité

Section 1 ‐ Offences against property

Art.462

‐ Any person who fraudulently copies or attempts to copy computer data to the detriment of a third party shall be punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA or by only one of these two penalties.

Art.463

‐ Any person who, either by using false names or false qualities, or by employing any fraudulent manoeuvres whatsoever, shall have obtained the delivery or shall have attempted to obtain the delivery of computer data and shall have, by one of these means, swindled or attempted to swindle all or part of another person's property, shall be punished by the same penalties as those provided for fraud relating to tangible property.

Art.464

‐ Any person who, having received computer data from owners, possessors or holders by way of lease, deposit, mandate, pledge, loan for use or for paid or unpaid work, shall not have, after simple formal notice, fulfilled their obligation to return or represent them or to make a specified use or employment of them, shall be punished by the same penalties as those provided for breach of trust relating to tangible property.

Art.465

‐ Any person who, knowingly, shall have concealed, in whole or in part, computer data removed, misappropriated or obtained by means of a crime or an offence, shall be punished by the same penalties as those provided for receiving relating to tangible property.
111

Art.466

‐ The fact that any person who, either by using false names or false qualities, or by employing any fraudulent manoeuvres whatsoever, shall have had delivered or issued to them, or shall have attempted to have delivered or issued to them, funds, movable property or obligations, dispositions, bills, promises, receipts or discharges by means of a computer system of an electronic communications network and shall have, by one of these means, swindled all or part of another person's property, shall be considered as an aggravated offence and punished by imprisonment of five to ten years and a fine of 2,000,000 to 20,000,000 FCFA or by only one of these two penalties.

Section 2 ‐ Offences against national defence

Art.467

‐ Any Chadian citizen who shall be punished by imprisonment of five to ten years:
• a) delivers to a foreign power or its agents, in whatever form or by whatever means, information, an object, document, process, digitised data or computerised file which must be kept secret in the interest of national defence;
• b) secures, by whatever means, possession of such information, object, document, process, computerised data or computerised file with a view to delivering it to a foreign power or its agents;
• c) destroys or allows to be destroyed such information, object, document, process, computerised data or computerised file with a view to delivering it to a foreign power.

Section 3 ‐ Press offences

Art.468

‐ A person who commits a press offence, in particular defamation, public insult, or apology for crime, by means of a public electronic communication medium, commits an offence punishable by the same penalties as those provided for press offences committed by other means.

Section 4 ‐ Liability of legal persons

Art.469

‐ Legal persons are criminally liable for the offences provided for in this chapter, under the conditions set out in Articles 81 and 82 of this Code.
They are furthermore held liable when the absence of supervision or control has made possible the commission of the offences provided for in this chapter on behalf of the said legal person by a natural person acting under its authority.

Art.470.‐ The penalties incurred by legal persons are

• a) a fine the maximum rate of which is equal to five times that provided for natural persons by this chapter;
112

• b) dissolution, when the legal person was created or when it concerns an offence punished, with regard to natural persons, by a term of imprisonment exceeding five years, diverted from its purpose to commit the incriminated acts;
• c) prohibition permanently or for a period of five years at most from exercising directly or indirectly one or more professional or social activities;
• d) permanent closure or for a period of five years at most of one or more establishments of the enterprise having served to commit the incriminated acts;
• e) exclusion from public contracts permanently or for a period of five years at most;
• f) prohibition permanently or for a period of five years at most from making public appeals for savings;
• g) prohibition, for a period of five years at most, from issuing cheques other than those which allow the withdrawal of funds by the drawer from the drawee or those which are certified or from using payment cards;
• h) confiscation of the thing which served or was intended to commit the offence or of the thing which is the product thereof;
• i) posting of the decision pronounced or dissemination thereof either by the written press, or by any means of communication to the public, by electronic means.

Chapter 4

‐ Serious abuse or acts of cruelty towards animals Art.471.‐ Whoever exercises serious abuse or commits an act of cruelty towards a domestic animal, tamed or held in captivity, shall be punished by three months to two years' imprisonment and a fine of 25,000 to 50,000 FCFA.
The court may prohibit the keeping of the said animal permanently or not as an additional penalty.
The provisions of this article are not applicable to animal fights when an uninterrupted tradition can be established.
Whoever abandons a domestic animal, tamed or held in captivity, shall be punished only by the fine penalty provided for in paragraph 1.

Art.472

‐ The perpetrators of scientific or experimental experiments or research on animals, when they are conducted in violation of the laws and regulations in force, shall be punished by the penalties provided for in Article 471 paragraph I.
113

Book 7

‐ Penalties applicable to offences provided for by the Uniform Acts of OHADA

Chapter 1 ‐ Offences against the provisions of the Uniform Act relating to general

commercial law

Art.473

‐ Any person, required to complete one of the registration formalities in the Trade and Movable Credit Register, and who has abstained therefrom, or who has completed a formality by fraud, shall be punished by a fine of 50,000 to 200,000 FCFA.
If necessary, the court pronouncing the conviction shall order the completion of the omitted formalities, the rectification of inaccurate entries and transcriptions.

Art.474

‐ Any lessee-manager who has abstained from indicating at the head of their order forms, invoices and other documents of a financial or commercial nature, together with their registration number in the Trade and Movable Credit Register, their capacity as lessee-manager of the business, shall be punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 1,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA.

Chapter 2

‐ Offences against the provisions of the Uniform Act relating to the law of commercial companies and economic interest groupings

This excerpt sits under: Chad > Book 6 ‐ Other crimes and offences > Chapter 3

Art.475

‐ Any act, by the founders, the chairman and chief executive officer, the chief executive officer,
the general manager or the deputy general manager of a public limited company, of issuing
shares before registration or at any time when registration is
obtained by fraud or when the company is irregularly constituted, is punishable by
imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of
1,000,000 to 10,000,000 FCFA.

Art.476

‐ Any person who knowingly, by establishing the notarial declaration of
subscription and payment or the depositary's certificate, has affirmed as sincere and true
subscriptions that they knew to be fictitious or has declared that funds which have not been placed
definitively at the disposal of the company have been effectively paid, is punishable by
imprisonment of one to ten years and a fine of 5,000,000 to
50,000,000 FCFA.

Art.477

‐ Any person who has submitted to the notary or to the depositary, a list of
shareholders or subscription and payment bulletins mentioning fictitious
subscriptions or payments of funds which have not been placed definitively at the disposal of the
company, is punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 2,000,000 to
20,000,000 FCFA.

Art.478

‐ Any person who knowingly, by simulation of subscription or payment or
by publication of subscription or payment which do not exist or by
114

any other false act, has obtained or attempted to obtain subscriptions or payments, is punishable
by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 2,000,000 to
20,000,000 FCFA.

Art.479.‐ Any person who knowingly, to induce subscriptions or

payments has published the names of persons designated contrary to the truth as
being or to be attached to the company in any capacity whatsoever or who, fraudulently,
has caused a contribution in kind to be attributed a valuation higher than its real value, is punishable by
imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of
2,000,000 to 20,000,000 FCFA.

Art.480

‐ Is punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 2,000,000 to
20,000,000 FCFA, any person who has knowingly negotiated:
• registered shares which have not remained in registered form until their
full payment;
• shares issued for contributions in kind before the expiration of the period during which they are not
negotiable;
• shares issued for cash for which payment of one quarter of the nominal value has not been
made.

Art.481

‐ Are punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 2,000,000 to
20,000,000 FCFA, all company directors who, in the absence of inventory or by means
of fraudulent inventory, have knowingly distributed fictitious dividends among the shareholders or members.

Art.482

‐ Are punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 2,000,000 to
20,000,000 FCFA, company directors who have knowingly, even in the absence of any
distribution of dividends, published or presented to shareholders or members, with a view to concealing
the true situation of the company, summary financial statements not giving, for each
financial year, a true and fair view of the operations of the financial year, of the financial situation and of that of
the company's assets, at the expiration of that period.

Art.483.‐ Is punishable by imprisonment of six months to five years and a fine of

3,000,000 to 30,000,000 FCFA, the manager of a limited liability company, the
directors, the chairman and chief executive officer, the chief executive officer, the general manager or
the deputy general manager who, in bad faith, make use of the company's assets or credit in a manner
they knew to be contrary to the interests of the company, for personal purposes, material or
moral, or to favour another legal person in which they had an interest,
directly or indirectly.
In addition, the judge may order the prohibition from exercising the functions of manager of a limited liability company,
director, chairman and chief executive officer, chief executive officer, general manager or
deputy general manager for a period which may not exceed five years.
115

Art.484.‐ Are punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of

2,000,000 to 20,000,000 FCFA, all those who, knowingly, have prevented a shareholder or a
member from participating in a general meeting.

Art.485.‐ Are punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of

2,000,000 to 20,000,000 FCFA, the chairman of the board of directors, the chairman and chief
executive officer, the chief executive officer, the general manager or the deputy general manager of a
public limited company who, during a capital increase, have issued shares or share
certificates:
• before the depositary's certificate has been established;
• without the formalities prior to the capital increase having been regularly
completed;
• without the previously subscribed capital of the company having been fully paid up;
• without the new shares issued for contributions in kind having been fully paid up before
the amending registration in the trade and movable credit register;
• without the new shares having been paid up by at least one quarter of their nominal value
at the time of subscription;
• where applicable, without the entirety of the share premium having been paid up at the time of
subscription.
Criminal sanctions are also applicable to the persons referred to in this article who
have not maintained the shares issued for cash in registered form until their full
payment.

Art.486.‐ Are punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of

2,000,000 to 20,000,000 FCFA, company directors who, during a capital increase:
• have not granted shareholders, in proportion to the amount of their
shares, a preferential right to subscribe for shares issued for cash when this right has
not been removed by the general meeting and the shareholders have not waived it;
• have not reserved for shareholders a period of at least twenty days, from the date of
the opening of the subscription, except when this period has been closed early;
• have not allocated the shares made available, for lack of a sufficient number of
subscriptions on an irreducible basis, to shareholders who have subscribed on a reducible basis for a number
of shares greater than that which they could subscribe for on an irreducible basis in proportion
to the rights they hold;
• have not reserved the rights of holders of subscription warrants.

Art.487.‐ Are punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of

2,000,000 to 20,000,000 FCFA, company directors who, knowingly, have given or confirmed
inaccurate information in the reports presented to the general meeting called to decide on
the removal of the preferential subscription right.

Art.488.‐ Are punishable by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of

2,000,000 to 20,000,000 FCFA, the directors, the chairman and chief executive officer, the
116

chief executive officer, the general manager or the deputy general manager who, knowingly,
have proceeded with a capital reduction:
• 1° without respecting the equality of shareholders;
• 2° without having communicated the draft capital reduction to the statutory auditors
forty-five days before the holding of the general meeting called to rule on the
capital reduction.

Art.489

‐ Are punishable by imprisonment of three months to five years and a fine of
500,000 to 5,000,000 FCFA, company directors who have not initiated the appointment
of the company's statutory auditors or have not convened them to general meetings.

Title 5 ‐ Offences relating to the control of companies

Art.490

‐ Any person who, either in their own name or as a partner of an auditing firm, has knowingly accepted, exercised or retained the functions of auditor, notwithstanding legal incompatibilities, shall be punished by imprisonment of one to ten years and a fine of 5,000,000 to 50,000,000 FCFA.
In addition, the judge may pronounce a prohibition from exercising the function of auditor for a period not exceeding five years.

Art.491

‐ Any auditor who, either in their own name or as a partner of an auditing firm, has knowingly given or confirmed false information about the situation of the company or has not disclosed to the public prosecutor criminal acts of which they have become aware, shall be punished by imprisonment of one to ten years and a fine of 5,000,000 to 50,000,000 FCFA.
In addition, the judge may pronounce a prohibition from exercising the function of auditor for a period not exceeding five years.

Art.492.‐ Company directors or any person in the service of the company who, knowingly, have obstructed the verifications or control of the auditors or have refused the communication, on site, of all documents useful for the exercise of their mission and in particular of all contracts, books, accounting documents and minutes registers, shall be punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of

2,000,000 to 20,000,000 FCFA.

Art.493.‐ Company directors who, knowingly, when the company's equity becomes less than half of the share capital due to losses recorded in the summary financial statements, shall be punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of

2,000,000 to 20,000,000 FCFA:
• 1‐ have not convened, within four months following the approval of the summary financial statements showing these losses, the extraordinary general meeting for the purpose of deciding, if necessary, the early dissolution of the company;
117

• 2‐ have not filed with the registry of the court responsible for commercial matters, registered in the trade and movable credit register and published in a journal authorized to receive legal notices, the early dissolution of the company.

Art.494

‐ The liquidator of a company who, knowingly, shall be punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 2,000,000 to 20,000,000 FCFA:
• has not, within one month from their appointment, published in a journal authorized to receive legal notices of the place of the registered office, the act appointing them liquidator and filed with the trade and movable credit register the decisions pronouncing the dissolution;
• has not convened the partners, at the end of the liquidation, to rule on the final account of the liquidation, on the discharge of their management and the release of their mandate and to record the closure of the liquidation;
• has not, in the cases provided for in this chapter, filed their final accounts with the registry of the court responsible for commercial matters of the place of the registered office, nor requested in court the approval thereof.

Art.495

‐ The liquidator who, knowingly, shall be punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of 2,000,000 to 20,000,000 FCFA:
• has not, within six months of their appointment, presented a report on the assets and liabilities of the company in liquidation and on the continuation of liquidation operations, nor requested the necessary authorizations to complete them;
• has not, within three months of the close of each financial year, prepared the summary financial statements in view of the inventory and a written report in which they account for the liquidation operations during the past financial year;
• has not allowed the partners to exercise, during the liquidation period, their right to access company documents under the same conditions as previously;
• has not convened the partners, at least once a year, to report to them on the summary financial statements in case of continuation of the company's operations;
• has not deposited in an account opened in a bank in the name of the company in liquidation, within fifteen days from the distribution decision, the sums allocated to distributions among the partners and creditors;
• has not deposited, in a consignment account opened in the books of the Treasury, within one year from the closure of the liquidation, the sums allocated to creditors or partners and not claimed by them.
In addition, the judge may pronounce a prohibition from exercising the functions of trustee for a period not exceeding five years.

Art.496

‐ Any liquidator who, in bad faith, shall be punished by imprisonment of one to ten years and a fine of 5,000,000 to 50,000,000 FCFA:
• has made use of the assets or credit of the company in liquidation in a manner they knew to be contrary to the interest of the company, for personal purposes or to favor another legal entity in which they had an interest, directly or indirectly;
• has transferred all or part of the assets of the company in liquidation to a person who had in the company the capacity of general partner, limited partner, manager, member of the
118

board of directors, general administrator or auditor, without having obtained the unanimous consent of the partners or, failing that, the authorization of the competent court.
In addition, the judge may pronounce a prohibition from exercising the function of liquidator for a period not exceeding five years.

Art.497.‐ Presidents, directors or general managers of companies who have issued securities offered to the public shall be punished by imprisonment of one to five years and a fine of

2,000,000 to 20,000,000 FCFA:
• without a notice being inserted in a journal authorized to receive legal notices, prior to any publicity measure;
• without the prospectuses and circulars reproducing the statements of the notice provided for in the point above and containing the mention of the insertion of this notice in the journal authorized to receive legal notices with reference to the issue in which it was published;
• without the posters and advertisements in the newspapers reproducing the same statements or at least an extract of these statements with reference to said notice, and indications of the issue number of the journal authorized to receive legal notices in which it was published;
• without the posters, prospectuses and circulars mentioning the signature of the person or representative of the company from which the offer emanates and specifying whether the securities offered are listed or not and, if so, on which stock exchange.
The same criminal sanction shall apply to persons who have acted as intermediaries on the occasion of the transfer of securities without the requirements of this article having been complied with.

Chapter 3

‐ Offences against the provisions of the Uniform Act on the organization of security interests

Art.498

‐ Any debtor or any person who, by fraudulent maneuvers, deprives the pledgee creditor of their rights or diminishes them, shall be punished by imprisonment of three years to five years and a fine of 500,000 to 5,000,000 FCFA.

Art.499

‐ The lessee or any person who, by fraudulent maneuvers, deprives the lessor of their privilege totally or partially, shall be punished by a fine of 50,000 to 200,000 francs.

Chapter 4

‐ Offences against the provisions of the Uniform Act on the organization of collective proceedings for clearing liabilities

Art.500

‐ The offence of simple bankruptcy and offences treated as simple bankruptcy are punishable by imprisonment from one month to two years.
119

Art.501

‐ Any natural person in a state of cessation of payments who is in one of the following cases is guilty of simple bankruptcy:
• if he or she has contracted, without receiving values in exchange, commitments deemed too significant having regard to his or her situation at the time they were contracted;
• if, with the intention of delaying the finding of cessation of payments, he or she has made purchases with a view to resale below market price or if, with the same intention, he or she has used ruinous means to obtain funds;
• if, without legitimate excuse, he or she does not make to the registry of the competent court the declaration of his or her state of cessation of payments within thirty days;
• if his or her accounting is incomplete or irregularly kept or if he or she has not kept any accounting in accordance with accounting rules and recognized practices of the profession having regard to the size of the enterprise;
• if, having been declared twice in a state of cessation of payments within a period of five years, these proceedings have been closed for insufficiency of assets.

Art.502.‐ The provisions of this section are applicable

• to natural persons who are directors of legal persons subject to collective proceedings;
• to natural persons who are permanent representatives of legal persons who are directors of the legal persons referred to in the point above.
The directors referred to in this article mean all directors de jure or de facto and, in general, any person having directly or through an intermediary, administered, managed or liquidated the legal person under cover of or in place of its legal representatives.

Art.503

‐ The directors referred to in the article above who have, in that capacity and in bad faith, are punished with the penalties for simple bankruptcy:
• consumed sums belonging to the legal person by carrying out purely speculative transactions or fictitious transactions;
• with the intention of delaying the finding of cessation of payments of the legal person, made purchases with a view to resale below market price or, with the same intention, used ruinous means to obtain funds;
• after cessation of payments of the legal person, paid or caused to be paid a creditor to the prejudice of the estate;
• caused the legal person to contract, on behalf of others, without it receiving values in exchange, commitments deemed too significant having regard to its situation at the time they were contracted;
• kept or caused to be kept or allowed to be kept irregularly or incompletely the accounting of the legal person under the conditions provided for in this chapter;
• omitted to make to the registry of the competent court, within thirty days, the declaration of the state of cessation of payments of the legal person;
• with a view to removing all or part of their assets from the pursuit of the legal person in a state of cessation of payments or from that of the partners or creditors of the legal person, misappropriated or concealed, attempted to misappropriate or conceal part of their property or who fraudulently acknowledged themselves to be debtors of sums they did not owe.
120

In legal persons comprising partners indefinitely and jointly liable for the debts thereof, the legal or de facto representatives are guilty of simple bankruptcy if, without legitimate excuse, they do not make to the registry of the competent court, within thirty days, the declaration of their state of cessation of payments or if this declaration does not include the list of joint partners with indication of their names and addresses.
In addition, the judge may pronounce the prohibition from exercising the functions of manager of SARL, director, chairman and chief executive officer, chief executive officer, general administrator or deputy director administrator for a period which may not exceed five years.

Art.504

‐ The offence of fraudulent bankruptcy and offences treated as fraudulent bankruptcy are punishable by imprisonment from five to ten years.

Art.505

‐ Any natural person referred to in this chapter who, in case of cessation of payments, is guilty of fraudulent bankruptcy and punished with the penalty provided for in article 504 above:
• has removed his or her accounting;
• has misappropriated or dissipated all or part of his or her assets;
• either in his or her records, or by public acts or private written commitments, or in his or her balance sheet, has fraudulently acknowledged himself or herself to be a debtor of sums he or she did not owe;
• has exercised the commercial profession contrary to a prohibition provided for by the Uniform Acts or by the law of each Member State;
• after cessation of payments, has paid a creditor to the prejudice of the estate, has stipulated with a creditor particular advantages by reason of his or her vote in the deliberations of the estate or who has made with a creditor a particular agreement from which would result for the latter an advantage at the expense of the debtor's assets from the day of the opening decision.

Art.506

‐ Any natural person referred to in this chapter who, on the occasion of a judicial settlement procedure, is also guilty of fraudulent bankruptcy and punished with the penalties provided for in article 504:
• has, in bad faith, presented or caused to be presented an income statement or a balance sheet or a statement of debts and liabilities or an active and passive statement of privileges and securities, that is inaccurate or incomplete;
• has, without authorization of the President of the competent court, performed one of the acts prohibited by this chapter.
In addition, the judge may pronounce the prohibition from exercising the functions of manager of SARL, director, chairman and chief executive officer, chief executive officer, general administrator or deputy director administrator, as well as the prohibition from exercising civil rights and the prohibition from holding public employment, for a period which may not exceed five years.
121

Art.507

‐ The spouse, descendants, ascendants or collaterals of the debtor or his or her relatives by marriage who, without his or her knowledge, have misappropriated, diverted or concealed assets belonging to the assets of the debtor in a state of cessation of payments are punished with imprisonment from six months to five years and a fine from 3,000,000 to 30,000,000 FCFA.

Art.508

‐ Any person making an appeal to the public to the prejudice of a lessor, depositary, agent, pledgor, lender for use or principal, any trustee of a collective proceeding who carries on a personal activity under cover of the debtor's enterprise concealing his or her actions, is punished with imprisonment from one to ten years and a fine from 5,000,000 to 50,000,000 FCFA:
• disposes of the debtor's credit or property as his or her own;
• dissipates the debtor's property;
• abusively and in bad faith pursues, in his or her personal interest, either directly or indirectly, a loss-making operation of the debtor's enterprise;
• in violation of the provisions of this chapter, acquires for his or her own account, directly or indirectly, the debtor's property.
In addition, the judge may pronounce the prohibition from exercising the functions of trustee for a period which may not exceed five years.

Art.509.‐ Is punished by imprisonment from six months to five years and a fine of

3,000,000 to 30,000,000 FCFA, the creditor who has:
• stipulated with the debtor or with any persons, particular advantages by reason of his vote
in the deliberations of the body of creditors;
• made a particular agreement from which there would result in his favor an advantage at the expense of the assets of the
debtor from the day of the decision to open collective proceedings.

Chapitre 5 ‐ Offences against the provisions of the Uniform Act on

simplified recovery procedures and enforcement proceedings

Art.510

‐ Is punished in case of breach of his obligations by imprisonment from six months to
five years and a fine of 3,000,000 to 30,000,000 FCFA, the debtor subject to seizure or the third party holder
deemed custodian in whose hands the seizure was effected, if the seizure relates to tangible
property.

Art.511.‐ Is punished by imprisonment from six months to five years and a fine of

3,000,000 to 30,000,000 FCFA, the misappropriation of seized objects in the context of a
conservatory seizure procedure.
After having reminded the debtor that he is required to inform him of the property that may have been the subject
of a prior seizure and to provide him with the minutes thereof, the bailiff or enforcement
agent draws up minutes of seizure which contain, on pain of nullity:
122

• the mention of the authorization of the competent court or the instrument by virtue of which the seizure is
effected. These documents are annexed to the act in original or certified true copy;
• the mention, in very conspicuous characters, that the seized property is unavailable, that it is
placed under the custody of the debtor or a third party designated by agreement of the parties or, failing that by the
court ruling in urgent matters, that it may not be alienated or moved, except
in the case provided for in this chapter, under penalty of criminal sanctions, and that the debtor
is required to make known this seizure to any creditor who would proceed with a new
seizure on the same property;
• the reproduction of the criminal provisions sanctioning the misappropriation of seized objects.

Art.512.‐ Is punished by imprisonment from six months to five years and a fine of

3,000,000 to 30,000,000 FCFA, the misappropriation of seized objects in the context of a
seizure-sale procedure.
The bailiff or enforcement agent draws up an inventory of the property. The act of seizure contains, on pain of
nullity:
• the surnames, first names and domiciles of the person subject to seizure and the seizing party or, if they are legal persons,
their form, name and registered office, the possible election of domicile of the seizing party;
• the mention, in very conspicuous characters, that the seized property is unavailable, that it is
placed under the custody of the debtor, that it may not be alienated or moved, except
in the case provided for in this chapter, under penalty of criminal sanctions, and that the debtor is
required to make known this seizure to any creditor who would proceed with a new
seizure of the same property;
• the reproduction of the criminal provisions sanctioning the misappropriation of seized objects.

Art.513.‐ Is punished by imprisonment from six months to five years and a fine of

3,000,000 to 30,000,000 FCFA, the misappropriation of seized objects in the context of a seizure in the
hands of a third party.
If the third party declares that he holds property on behalf of the debtor, an inventory is drawn up which
contains, on pain of nullity:
• the reference to the instrument by virtue of which the seizure is effected;
• the mention, in very conspicuous characters, that the seized objects are unavailable, that they are
placed under the custody of the third party, that they may not be alienated or moved, except in the case
provided for in this chapter under penalty of criminal sanctions and that the third party is required to make
known this seizure to any creditor who would proceed with a seizure on the same property
;
• the reproduction of the criminal provisions sanctioning the misappropriation of seized objects.

Art.514

‐ Is punished by imprisonment from three months to three years and a fine of 3,000,000 to
30,000,000 FCFA, the auctioneer or any other auxiliary of justice,
123

charged with the sale and personally responsible for the price of the adjudications, who has received a
sum above the bid.

Art.515.‐ Is punished by imprisonment from six months to five years and a fine of

3,000,000 to 30,000,000 FCFA, the misappropriation of seized objects in the context of a
conservatory seizure.
After having reminded the holder of the property that he is required to inform him if this property has been the subject
of a prior seizure and, where applicable, to provide him with the minutes thereof, the bailiff or enforcement
agent draws up an act of seizure which contains on pain of nullity:
• the surnames, first names and domiciles of the creditors and debtors or, if they are legal
persons, their form, name and registered office;
• the mention, in very conspicuous characters, that the seized property is placed under the custody of the holder
who may not alienate it or move it except in the case provided for in article 511 above, under penalty
of criminal sanctions and that he is required to make known the revendication seizure to any creditor
who would proceed with a seizure on the same property;
• the reproduction of the criminal provisions relating to the misappropriation of seized objects.
The bailiff or enforcement agent may photograph the seized property under the conditions prescribed
by this chapter.

Chapitre 6

‐ Offences against the provisions of the Uniform Act on the organization
and harmonization of accounting for enterprises

Art.516

‐ Are punished by imprisonment from one month to two years and a fine of
200,000 to 2,000,000 FCFA, individual entrepreneurs and company directors who have
not, for each financial year, drawn up the inventory and prepared the annual financial statements as well as, where
applicable, the management report and the social balance sheet.
In addition, the judge may pronounce the prohibition from exercising the functions of manager of SARL,
director, chairman and chief executive officer, chief executive officer, general administrator or
deputy director administrator, as well as the prohibition from exercising civil rights and
the prohibition from occupying public employment, for a period which may not exceed five years.

Art.517

‐ Is punished by imprisonment from five to ten years and a fine of 500,000 to
5,000,000 FCFA, any accountant who has knowingly prepared and communicated financial statements
not giving a true and fair view of the assets, the financial position and the result of
the financial year.
In addition, the judge may pronounce the prohibition from exercising the functions of manager of SARL,
director, chairman and chief executive officer, chief executive officer, general administrator or
deputy director administrator, as well as the prohibition from exercising civil rights and
the prohibition from occupying public employment, for a period which may not exceed five years.
124

Book 8 ‐ Petty police offences

Art.518

‐ Shall be punished by a fine of 2,000 to 20,000 FCFA and may in addition be punished by
imprisonment for up to fifteen days at most:
Intentional wrongs and damage:
1. The perpetrators or accomplices of brawls, assaults or minor violence, provided that the blows
inflicted have not resulted in any incapacity for work;
2. Those who, without having been provoked, have uttered against someone insults other than those
provided for by the press law;
3. Those who, without necessity, have committed an act of cruelty towards an animal, domestic
or otherwise;
4. Those who, outside the cases provided for in articles 396, 397, 398 and 471 of this Code, have
intentionally caused damage to the movable property and domestic animals of others;
5. Those who have intentionally diverted or unduly used water intended for
irrigation by law or by regulatory provisions emanating from the administration or
distribution bodies or by custom;
6. Those who, outside the cases provided for in article 396 of this Code, have felled, mutilated or stripped
trees of which they are not the owners;
7. Those who have thrown stones or other hard objects or filth against the houses,
buildings or fences of others or into gardens or enclosures;
8. Those who, without being authorized, have made inscriptions or posted notices on a movable
or immovable property belonging to others;
9. Those who, without being duly authorized, have removed from public roads, turf, earth,
stones or who, in places belonging to communes, have removed earth or materials, unless
there exists a general custom that authorizes it.
Involuntary damage:
10. Those who, through clumsiness, imprudence, inattention, negligence or non-observance of
regulations, have involuntarily been the cause of injuries, blows, illnesses or damage
not resulting in an incapacity for work exceeding six days.
11. Those who, through clumsiness, imprudence, inattention, negligence or non-observance of
regulations, have caused the fire of movable or immovable property belonging to
others.
Disturbances to public order or peace:
125

12. The perpetrators or accomplices of noise, uproar or insulting or nocturnal gatherings
disturbing the tranquility of the inhabitants;
13. People who make a profession of divining, prognosticating, explaining dreams; those who
assume the quality of sorcerers to influence populations;
14. Those who, without authorization, have established or kept in public places lottery games or
other games of chance;
15. Those who have displayed or caused to be displayed in public places posters or images
contrary to decency;
16. Those who have refused to accept national coins and currency that are not counterfeit or altered,
for the value for which they are legal tender;
17. Those who have drafted, prepared or incited to draft or prepare petitions,
letters or documents in the name of a community without being mandated by it to do so, and those
who make use of these letters, petitions or documents, knowing their abusive nature;
18. Those who, outside the cases provided for by other provisions of the law, have publicly
worn a costume presenting a resemblance of a nature to cause confusion in the mind of the
public with the uniforms defined by regulatory texts;
19. Those who have refused to obey a regulatory order given by an administrative agent
or member of the police force in the exercise of their functions;
20. Those who have refused, without legitimate reason, to provide information to an authority
duly empowered to obtain it or who have knowingly communicated false
information to it.
Urban planning or road offences:
21 .Those who have thrown or displayed in front of their buildings things of a nature to harm by their fall or
by unhealthy exhalations;
22. Those who have neglected to clean the streets or passages in localities where this care is left to
the responsibility of the inhabitants;
23. Those who have obstructed the public road by depositing or leaving there without necessity
materials or any things that prevent or diminish the freedom or safety of
passage;
24. Those who, in contravention of laws and regulations, have neglected to signal the materials
stored by them or the excavations made by them on the public road;
25. Those who have neglected or refused to execute the regulations or orders concerning minor
roads, or to obey the summons emanating from the administrative authority, to repair or demolish
buildings threatening to collapse;
126

26. The drivers of carts who have contravened the regulations by which they are
obliged to remain constantly within reach of their draft animals and their vehicles, and in a state to
guide and drive them.
Failures of supervision:
27. Those who have allowed to wander, in an inhabited place, animals likely to harm the
safety of traffic;
28. Those who have allowed to wander insane persons under their care or harmful
or ferocious animals;
29. Those who have incited or have not restrained their dogs, when they attack or
pursue passers-by, even if no harm or damage has resulted.
Failures of assistance:
30. Those who, being able to, have refused or neglected to do the work or to provide the service or
assistance of which they have been required, in circumstances of accident, public calamities
as well as in cases of brigandage, flagrant offence or public outcry.
Non-observance of certain obligations:
31. Those who have neglected to destroy harmful insects or animals when this care is
prescribed by law or regulations;
32. Hoteliers, lodging-house keepers or lessors of furnished houses, who have neglected to record immediately on
a register kept regularly, the names, qualities, usual domicile, dates of entry and exit
of any person who has slept or spent a night in their houses; those among them who
have failed to present this register at the times determined by the regulation, or, when they
have been required to do so, to mayors, deputies, officers or police commissioners, or to citizens
appointed for this purpose.

Art.519

‐ Decrees containing penal provisions may provide that contraventions
of the provisions they enact shall be punished by the penalties set out in the preceding article.
In case of silence of the decree and in case of contraventions of all other regulations legally
made by the administrative authority, the penalties set out in the preceding article shall be applied.

Book 9 ‐ Miscellaneous and final provisions

Art.520

‐ All references to the penalty of hard labor for life, whether in the texts cited
in this law, or in other texts in force, are deemed to refer to the penalty
of imprisonment of twenty to thirty years.
127

All references to the penalty of hard labor for a fixed term, whether in the texts cited in this
law, or in other texts in force, are deemed to refer to the penalty
of imprisonment.
Any new provision of penalties provided for the repression of offences relating to
Uniform Acts of OHADA applies in this Code.

Art.521

‐ This law shall come into force on the first day of the third month following the date of its
promulgation.

Art.522

‐ All previous provisions contrary to those of this law are repealed with
the exception of law no. 034/PR/2015 of 5 August 2015 on the repression of acts of terrorism
in Chad.

Art.523

‐ This law shall be registered and published in the Official Journal of the Republic and executed
as law of the State.
128

This excerpt sits under: Chad
