LAW 1257 OF 2008

LAW 1257 OF 2008
(December 4)
Official Gazette No. 47,193 of December 4, 2008 CONGRESS OF THE REPUBLIC
By which norms for awareness, prevention and punishment of forms of violence and discrimination against women are enacted, the Penal Code, the Code of Criminal Procedure, Law 294 of 1996 are reformed and other provisions are enacted.
THE CONGRESS OF COLOMBIA DECREES:.

CHAPTER I. GENERAL PROVISIONS

ARTICLE 1. PURPOSE OF THE LAW. The purpose of this law is the adoption of norms that allow guaranteeing for all women a life free of violence, both in the public and private spheres, the exercise of rights recognized in the domestic and international legal order, access to administrative and judicial procedures for their protection and care, and the adoption of public policies necessary for their realization.
ARTICLE 2. DEFINITION OF VIOLENCE AGAINST WOMEN. Violence against women means any action or omission that causes death, harm or physical, sexual, psychological, economic or patrimonial suffering due to her condition as a woman, as well as threats of such acts, coercion or arbitrary deprivation of liberty, whether it occurs in the public or private sphere.
For the purposes of this law, and in accordance with the provisions of the Action Plans of the Vienna, Cairo and Beijing Conferences, economic violence means any action or omission aimed at economic abuse, abusive control of finances, monetary rewards or punishments to women by reason of their social, economic or political condition. This form of violence can be consolidated in couple relationships, family relationships, labor relationships or economic relationships.
ARTICLE 3. CONCEPT OF HARM AGAINST WOMEN. To interpret this law, the following definitions of harm are established:
a)	Psychological harm: Consequence arising from action or omission intended to degrade or control the actions, behaviors, beliefs and decisions of other persons, by means of intimidation, manipulation, threat, direct or indirect, humiliation, isolation or any other conduct that implies harm to psychological health, self-determination or personal development.
b)	Physical harm or suffering: Risk or diminution of the bodily integrity of a person.
c)	Sexual harm or suffering: Consequences arising from the action consisting of forcing a person to maintain sexualized contact, physical or verbal, or to participate in other sexual interactions through the use of force, intimidation, coercion, blackmail, bribery, manipulation, threat or any other mechanism that nullifies or limits personal will. Likewise, it shall be considered sexual harm or suffering the fact that the aggressor forces the victim to perform any of these acts with third parties.
d)	Patrimonial harm: Loss, transformation, removal, destruction, retention or misappropriation of objects, work instruments, personal documents, goods, assets, rights or economic resources intended to satisfy the needs of the woman.

ARTICLE 4

CRITERIA FOR INTERPRETATION. The principles contained in the Political Constitution, and in the International Treaties or Conventions on human rights ratified by Colombia, especially the convention on the elimination of all forms of discrimination against women and the inter-American convention to prevent, punish and eradicate violence against women, other laws, jurisprudence referring to the matter, shall serve as a guide for its interpretation and application.
ARTICLE 5. MINIMUM GUARANTEES. The enumeration of rights and guarantees contained in the legal order should not be understood as a denial of others that being inherent to women are not expressly stated therein.

CHAPTER II. PRINCIPLES

ARTICLE 6. PRINCIPLES. The interpretation and application of this law shall be made in accordance with the following principles:
1.	Real and effective equality. It is the responsibility of the State to design, implement and evaluate public policies to achieve women's access to services and the actual fulfillment of their rights.
2.	Human rights. Women's rights are Human Rights.
3.	Principle of Co-responsibility. Society and the Family are responsible for respecting the rights of women and for contributing to the elimination of violence against them. The State is responsible for preventing, investigating and punishing all forms of violence against women.
4.	Comprehensiveness. Care for women victims of violence shall include information, prevention, guidance, protection, punishment, reparation and stabilization.
5.	Autonomy. The State recognizes and protects the independence of women to make their own decisions without undue interference.
6.	Coordination. All entities that have within their functions the care of women victims of violence must exercise coordinated and articulated actions in order to provide them with comprehensive care.
7.	Non-Discrimination. All women regardless of their personal, social or economic circumstances such as age, ethnicity, sexual orientation, rural or urban origin, religion among others, shall have guaranteed the rights established in this law through a provision of minimum standards throughout the national territory.
8.	Differentiated Care. The State shall guarantee attention to the specific needs and circumstances of groups of women especially vulnerable or at risk, in such a way as to ensure their effective access to the rights enshrined in this law.

CHAPTER III. RIGHTS

ARTICLE 7. RIGHTS OF WOMEN. In addition to other rights recognized by law or in duly ratified international treaties and conventions, women have the right to a dignified life, to physical, sexual and psychological integrity, to privacy, not to be subjected to torture or to cruel and degrading treatment, to real and effective equality, not to be subjected to any form of discrimination, to freedom and autonomy, to the free development of personality, to health, to sexual and reproductive health and to personal security.
ARTICLE 8. RIGHTS OF VICTIMS OF VIOLENCE. Every victim of any of the forms of violence provided for in this law, in addition to those contemplated in article 11 of Law 906 of 2004 and article 15 of Law 360 of 1997, has the right to:
a)	Receive comprehensive care through services with sufficient coverage, accessible and of quality.
b)	Receive guidance, legal advice and legal technical assistance free of charge, immediate and specialized from the moment the act constituting violence is brought to the attention of the authority. It may be ordered that the aggressor assume the costs of this care and assistance. It is the responsibility of the State to guarantee this right by taking the corresponding actions against the aggressor and in any case will guarantee the provision of this service through the public defender's office;
c)	Receive clear, complete, truthful and timely information in relation to their rights and to the mechanisms and procedures contemplated in this law and other concordant norms;
d)	Give their informed consent for medico-legal examinations in cases of sexual violence and choose the sex of the practitioner for the performance thereof within the possibilities offered by the service. The promoting and providing entities of health services shall promote the existence of practitioners of both sexes for the care of victims of violence;
e)	Receive clear, complete, truthful and timely information in relation to sexual and reproductive health;
f)	Be treated with confidentiality of identity when receiving medical, legal, or social assistance with respect to their personal data, those of their descendants or those of any other person who is under their care or custody;
g)	Receive specialized and comprehensive medical, psychological, psychiatric and forensic assistance under the terms and conditions established in the legal system for them and their sons and daughters;

h)	Access the protection and care mechanisms for them, their sons and daughters;
i)	Truth, justice, reparation and guarantees of non-repetition in relation to the acts constituting violence;
j)	The stabilization of their situation in accordance with the terms provided in this law.
k)	To decide voluntarily whether they can be confronted with the aggressor in any of the care spaces and in administrative, judicial or other proceedings.

CHAPTER IV

AWARENESS AND PREVENTION MEASURES.
ARTICLE 9. AWARENESS AND PREVENTION MEASURES. All authorities responsible for formulating and implementing public policies must recognize the social and biological differences and inequalities in relations between persons according to sex, age, ethnicity and the role they play in the family and in the social group.
The National Government:
1.	Shall formulate, apply, update comprehensive national strategies, plans and programs for the prevention and eradication of all forms of violence against women.
2.	Shall execute training programs for public servants that guarantee adequate prevention, protection and care for women victims of violence, with special emphasis on justice operators, health personnel and police authorities.
3.	Shall implement in the aforementioned areas the recommendations of international organizations on Human Rights of women.
4.	Shall develop plans for prevention, detection and care of situations of harassment, sexual assault or any other form of violence against women.
5.	Shall implement measures to promote social sanction and the reporting of discriminatory practices and violence against women.
6.	Shall strengthen the presence of institutions responsible for prevention, protection and care of women victims of violence in geographical areas where their life and integrity are at special risk by virtue of conflict situations due to violent actions by armed actors.
7.	Shall develop prevention, protection and care programs for women in situations of displacement in relation to acts of violence against them.
8.	Adopt measures to investigate or sanction members of the police, the armed forces, security forces and other forces who commit acts of violence against girls and women who are in conflict situations due to the presence of armed actors.
9.	The responsible entities within the framework of this law shall provide information regarding gender violence to the information system determined by the Ministry of Social Protection and to the Presidential Council for Women's Equity, through the Observatory on Gender Issues, for information, monitoring and follow-up work.
Departments and Municipalities
1.	The issue of violence against women shall be included on the agenda of the Councils for Social Policy.
2.	Municipal and departmental development plans shall include a chapter on prevention and care for women victims of violence.

ARTICLE 10

COMMUNICATIONS. The Ministry of Communications shall develop dissemination programs that contribute to eradicating violence against women in all its forms, to guaranteeing respect for the dignity of women and to promoting equality between men and women, avoiding all discrimination against them.

ARTICLE 11

EDUCATIONAL MEASURES. The Ministry of Education, in addition to those indicated in other laws, shall have the following functions:
1.	Ensure that educational institutions incorporate training in respect for the rights, freedoms, autonomy and equality between men and women as part of the course on Human Rights.
2.	Develop policies and programs that contribute to raising awareness, training and educating the educational community, especially teachers, students and parents, on the issue of violence against women.
3.	Design and implement prevention and protection measures against the dropping out of school of women victims of any form of violence.

4.	Promote the participation of women in occupational habilitation and professional training programs that are non-traditional for them, especially in basic sciences and applied sciences.

ARTICLE 12

MEASURES IN THE LABOR SPHERE. The Ministry of Social Protection, in addition to those indicated in other laws, shall have the following functions:
1.	It shall promote the social and economic recognition of women's work and shall implement mechanisms to make effective the right to equal pay.
2.	It shall develop campaigns to eradicate all acts of discrimination and violence against women in the labor sphere.
3.	It shall promote the entry of women into productive spaces that are non-traditional for women. SOLE PARAGRAPH. The Professional Risk Administrators (ARP), employers and/or contractors, with respect to each of them, shall adopt adequate and effective procedures to:
1.	Make effective the right to equal pay for women.
2.	Process complaints of sexual harassment and other forms of violence against women contemplated in this law. These rules shall also apply to associated work cooperatives and other organizations that have a similar purpose.
3.	The Ministry of Social Protection shall ensure that the Professional Risk Administrators (ARP) and the Boards of Directors of Companies comply with the provisions of this paragraph.

ARTICLE 13

MEASURES IN THE HEALTH SPHERE. The Ministry of Social Protection, in addition to those indicated in other laws, shall have the following functions:
1.	It shall prepare or update the protocols and guidelines for action by health institutions and their personnel in cases of violence against women. Within the framework of this law, for the preparation of the protocols the Ministry shall take special care in the attention and protection of victims.
2.	It shall regulate the Mandatory Health Plan so that it includes the activities of attention to victims that correspond in application of this law, and in particular those defined in subsections a), b) and c) of article 19 thereof.
3.	It shall include in the national and territorial health plans a section on prevention and comprehensive intervention in violence against women.
4.	It shall promote respect for women's decisions regarding the exercise of their sexual and reproductive rights.
SOLE PARAGRAPH. The National Health Plan shall define actions and allocate resources to prevent violence against women as a component of public health actions. All public health plans and programs at the territorial level shall include actions in the same sense

ARTICLE 14

DUTIES OF THE FAMILY. The family shall have the duty to promote the rights of women at all stages of their lives recognized and enshrined in this law and likewise the elimination of all forms of violence and inequality against women.
The duties of the family for these purposes are:
1.	To prevent any act that threatens or violates the rights of women indicated in this law.
2.	To refrain from performing any act or conduct that implies physical, sexual, psychological or patrimonial abuse against women.
3.	To refrain from performing any act or conduct that implies discrimination against women.
4.	To participate in democratic spaces for discussion, design, formulation and execution of policies, plans, programs and projects of interest for the elimination of discrimination and violence against women.
5.	To promote the participation and respect of women in decisions related to the family environment.
6.	To respect and promote the exercise of women's autonomy.
7.	To respect and promote the exercise of the sexual and reproductive rights of women.
8.	To respect the cultural, religious, political and sexual manifestations of women.
9.	To provide women with disabilities dignified and equal treatment with all members of the family and to generate conditions of equity, opportunities and autonomy so that

they can exercise their rights. To enable adequate spaces and guarantee their participation in matters related to their family and social environment.
10.	To perform all actions that are necessary to ensure the exercise of women's rights and eliminate violence and discrimination against them in the family environment. SOLE PARAGRAPH. In indigenous peoples, Afro-descendant communities and other ethnic groups, the obligations of the family shall be established in accordance with their traditions and cultures, provided that they are not contrary to the Political Constitution and international Human Rights instruments.

ARTICLE 15

OBLIGATIONS OF SOCIETY. In fulfillment of the principle of co-responsibility, civil society organizations, associations, companies, organized commerce, economic guilds and other legal and natural persons have the responsibility to take an active part in achieving the elimination of violence and discrimination against women. For these purposes they must:
1.	Know, respect and promote the rights of women recognized and indicated in this law.
2.	Refrain from performing any act or conduct that implies physical, sexual, psychological or patrimonial abuse against women.
3.	Refrain from performing any act or conduct that implies discrimination against women.
4.	Report violations of women's rights and violence and discrimination against them.
5.	Participate actively in the formulation, management, compliance, evaluation and control of public policies related to women's rights and the elimination of violence and discrimination against them.
6.	Collaborate with the authorities in the application of the provisions of this law and in the execution of policies that promote women's rights and the elimination of violence and discrimination against them.
7.	Perform all actions that are necessary to ensure the exercise of women's rights and eliminate violence and discrimination against them.

CHAPTER V. PROTECTION MEASURES

ARTICLE 16

Article 4 of Law 294 of 1996, as amended by article 1 of Law 575 of 2000, shall read as follows:
