Costa Rican Legal Information System

Costa Rican Legal Information System
Full Text
HOME
|
PGR SINALEVI
|
JUDICIAL BRANCH
|
TREASURY
|
IACHR
|
PJ LEGAL DICTIONARY
|
HELP
|
SITE MAP
Search:
Regulations >> Law 7586 >> Date 04/10/1996 >> Full text
Internet
Regulations
Pronouncements
Constitutional Matters
Year:
50 results
100 results
All results
Search in:
Document file
Text content
Advanced Search Menu
Full text
Regulation file
Affected regulations
Regulations that affected it
Concordances
PGR Pronouncements
Constitutional actions and resolutions
Observations
Related case law
Treasury Case Law
Original version
Previous version
Options:
Save
Print
Search articles
<<
Articles
>>
Regulation File
Law :
7586
(28 articles)
Article:
Sub-number:
0
BIS
TER
QUATER
QUINQUIES
SEXIES
OCTIES
NOVIES
DECIES
UNDECIES
DUODECIES
TREDECIES
QUATTUORDECIES
QUINDECIES
Type:
Regular
Transitional
Annex
Law :
7586
of
04/10/1996
Law against Domestic Violence
Issuing entity:
Legislative Assembly
Effective date from:
05/02/1996
Version of the regulation:
5 of 5
of 07/09/2019
Remember that Control F is an option that allows you to search
the entire text
Go to end of documentYou are in the latest version of the regulation
Full Text Regulation 7586
Law against Domestic Violence
Full text minutes: D85BE
1
No.
7586
LAW AGAINST DOMESTIC VIOLENCE
THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY
OF THE REPUBLIC OF COSTA RICA
DECREES:

CHAPTER I

General provisions

Article 1.- Purposes

This Law
shall regulate the application of protection measures necessary to guarantee
the life, integrity and dignity of victims of domestic violence, whose guiding
principle is Article 51 of the Political Constitution.
The
competent authority must ensure that aggressor persons do not use
this Law against the victims.
The
authorities involved in the application of this Law shall provide
special protection to mothers, minor persons, elderly persons and
persons with any disability condition, considering the
specific situations of each one.
Likewise,
this Law shall protect, in particular, victims of violence in
couple relationships or intrafamily sexual abuse.
(As amended by Article 1
of Law
No.
8925 of February 3, 2011
)
Article file

Article 2

Definitions
To interpret this law, the following
definitions are established:
a)
Domestic
violence:
Action or omission, direct or indirect, exercised
against a relative by consanguinity, affinity or adoption up to the
third degree inclusive, by legal or de facto bond or by a
guardianship, tutorship or curatorship relationship and which produces as a consequence,
the impairment of their physical, sexual, psychological or
patrimonial integrity. The bond by affinity shall subsist even when the
relationship that originated it has ended.
b)
Psychological
violence:
Action or omission intended to degrade or control
the actions, behaviors, beliefs and decisions of other persons, by
means of intimidation, manipulation, threat, direct or
indirect, humiliation, isolation or any other conduct that
implies harm to psychological health, self-
determination or personal development.
c)
Physical
violence:
Action or omission that risks or damages the
bodily integrity of a person.
d)
Sexual
violence:
Action that compels a person to maintain sexualized
contact
, physical or verbal, or to participate in
other sexual interactions through the use of force, intimidation, coercion,
blackmail, bribery, manipulation, threat or any other mechanism that
nullifies or limits personal will.
Likewise, it shall be considered
sexual violence the fact that the aggressor person compels the aggrieved person to perform
any of these acts with third parties.
e)
Patrimonial
violence:
Action or omission that implies damage, loss,
transformation, subtraction, destruction, retention
or distraction of objects, work instruments, personal documents,
goods, valuables, rights or economic resources intended to satisfy
the needs of any of the persons mentioned in subsection a) above.
f)
Kinship:
Relationship of adoption, affinity or consanguinity up to third
degree inclusive, by ascending, descending or collateral line, originated
in a legal, biological or de facto union
bond. The bond by affinity shall subsist even when the
relationship that originated it has ended.
The definitions included in subsections b),
c), d), e) and f) shall not be restrictive.
Article file

CHAPTER II

Protection measures

Article 3

Protection measures
When dealing with situations of domestic
violence, the competent authority shall order any of the following
protection measures:
a)
Order the
alleged aggressor person to leave the common domicile immediately and, according
to the particularities of the violence situation, limit them to an
area distant from that of the alleged aggrieved person. Within twenty-four
hours, the alleged aggressor person must inform the judicial
authority of the exact address of their new residence. They shall have the same obligation
each time they change residence. If they resist or fail to comply with the order they shall be
compelled by the Public Force, and testimony shall be taken for the crime of
failure to comply with a protection measure.
b)
Authorize the
alleged aggrieved person a different domicile from the common one, upon their request,
to protect them from future aggressions.
c)
Order the
search of the domicile, which may be carried out at any time when, due
to domestic violence, the physical, sexual,
patrimonial or psychological integrity of any of its inhabitants is seriously at risk. This measure shall
be carried out in accordance with the provisions of the Criminal Procedure Code.
d)
Prohibit the
alleged aggressor person from possessing or carrying firearms, sharp or
blunt instruments
. Likewise, prohibit the introduction or
maintenance of weapons in the dwelling when they are used to intimidate,
threaten or cause harm to any of the persons mentioned in subsection a) of

article 2 of this Law

e)
Confiscate weapons and
objects used to intimidate or assault, as well as any
other weapons found in possession of the alleged aggressor or
registered in their name, and order the cancellation of weapon carrying permits.
(Thus amended
the preceding paragraph by article 1 of law No. 9692 of July 9, 2019)
f)
If
necessary and according to the particularities of the case, the alleged aggressor may be provisionally suspended from exercising custody, care and education
of their minor children, as well as the representation and
administration of their assets and the protection of elderly persons
and persons with any disability condition.
g)
Order the
alleged aggressor to refrain from interfering, in any way, in the
exercise of custody, care and education of their children, as well as in
the representation and administration of their assets. The same measure may
be ordered in the protection and representation of elderly persons and
persons with any disability condition. The foregoing, in
cases where the competent authority orders the application of paragraph f) of this
article.
h)
Provisionally suspend
the alleged aggressor's right to visit
minor children, in cases where they exercise any type of
aggression.
i)
Entrust protective
custody to whomever the judicial authority considers suitable for that
function, if such custody has been assigned to the alleged aggressor, when
the victim is a minor, an elderly person who cannot fend
for themselves or a person with some degree of disability, in
cases where the competent authority orders the application of paragraph f) of this
article.
j)
Prohibit the
alleged aggressor from assaulting, disturbing or intimidating any
member of the family group of the alleged victim of domestic violence.
k)
Prohibit
access by the alleged aggressor to the permanent or temporary domicile of
the assaulted person and to their workplace or place of study.
Likewise, approaching said places within a
reasonable distance at the discretion of the female or male judge.
l)
Set a
provisional maintenance obligation in favor of the alleged victim and
other dependents as applicable, in accordance with the Law on maintenance
payments,
No. 7654, even when there is no suitable document to
prove the degree of kinship. Once set, ex officio, documents shall be copied
and sent to the corresponding judicial authority.
(The Constitutional Chamber by resolution No. 2896 of
June 14, 1996, established that the preceding paragraph is not unconstitutional,
in relation to article 10 of this
law, insofar as it is understood that: "against the decision of the family judge
imposing a provisional maintenance payment pursuant to them,
an appeal in one effect only is available, which must be processed and
resolved by the competent authority according to the special legislation governing
maintenance matters, to which the latter must immediately send the
copy of documents ordered by this Law").
(Sinalevi note: By article 2 section XIII) of the law
approving the Family Procedural Code, No. 9747 of October 23, 2019,
paragraph l) above shall be amended. In accordance with transitory provision III of the
aforementioned law, said amendment shall enter into force as of October 1,
2024, so from that date the new text shall be as
follows: "
l) Set a provisional
maintenance obligation in favor of the alleged victim and
other dependents as applicable, in accordance with article 270 of the Family
Procedural Code, even when there is no suitable document to prove
the degree of kinship. Once set, ex officio, documents shall be copied and
sent to the corresponding judicial authority.")
m)
Order preventive attachment,
for a maximum period of three months, counted from the date on
which the resolution ordering it is executed, on the family dwelling
and on the assets of the alleged aggressor necessary to
secure the maintenance obligation in favor of the assaulted person and
applicable dependents, in accordance with the law; said period may be
extended by the female or male judge when circumstances reasonably
warrant it. To apply this measure, no security deposit nor
payment of fees or other expenses shall be necessary.
n)
Prepare an
inventory of movable property existing in the household unit, in
particular household goods or others that serve as a means of work for
the assaulted person.
ñ)
Grant
exclusive use of household goods to the assaulted person. Special safeguards must be provided for
housing and household goods protected under the family patrimony
regime.
o)
Order the alleged
aggressor to refrain from interfering in the use and enjoyment of
work instruments of the assaulted person. When the latter is an
elderly person or has any disability condition, the alleged
aggressor must not interfere in the use and enjoyment of instruments
indispensable for the victim to fend for themselves or integrate into
society.
p)
Order the
alleged aggressor to make reparation in cash for damages and
losses caused to the assaulted person or to property that is
indispensable for them to continue their normal life. Transportation expenses,
property repairs, lodging and medical expenses are included. The amount shall be made
effective in the same proceeding through attachment and sale of
necessary assets to cover the damages caused, at the discretion of the
competent judicial authority.
q)
Issue a
protection and police assistance order directed to the public security
authority of their neighborhood. The victim shall carry a copy of this order so they may
go to the nearest authority, in case of threat of assault outside their
domicile.
To apply any of the measures
listed in this article or others that according to the particularities
of the situation of domestic violence must be adopted, the judicial
authority may request the collaboration of the administrative police and
judicial police.
If one or more of these measures are breached
in contravention of an order issued by the competent authority, the latter must
copy documents to the Public Prosecutor's Office so that prosecution may proceed for the
crime of breach of a protection measure.
(Thus amended by

article 1 of law No. 8925 of February 3, 2011)

Article file

This excerpt sits under: Costa Rican Legal Information System > CHAPTER II

Article 4

Duration
The
protection measures shall remain in force for one year, unless they are lifted or
modified earlier by final judicial resolution.
It
shall be the obligation of the Judicial Branch to create a registry with the names and
information of persons against whom protection measures have been imposed; for this purpose, the offices handling the matter shall be obliged to
send to the registry a copy of the resolutions ordering, modifying or terminating
the protection measures.
The
registry must necessarily be consulted by the judge who must
resolve a matter brought to his or her knowledge and which is related to the
registered facts.
The
information contained in this registry shall be confidential and for the exclusive use of
the Judicial Branch. The entries contained in this registry shall be
definitively cancelled within a period of five years, counted from the last
communicated resolution.
When the
alleged aggressors are minors, the registry may not
contain photographs of them; all registered information must be
used with respect for the regulations protecting the rights of
minors.
(Thus amended by article 1°
of law
No.
8925 of February 3, 2011
)
Article file

Article 5

Termination
The aggrieved
person or whoever has requested the measures, in accordance with article 7 of
this Law, may request the early lifting of the measure. The
judicial authority may order this action if it considers it appropriate,
after evaluation of the reports referred to in the following article 17.
When the
victim is a minor, the termination of the measure, if not
requested by a representative of the National Children's Trust,
shall only proceed when recommended by that institution, which shall be obliged to
issue a ruling.
The lifting may also be ordered ex officio or at the request of a party,
when it is evident that the law is being used contrary to its purposes.
(Thus amended article 1° of
law
No.
8925 of February 3, 2011
)
Article file

CHAPTER III

Procedure

Article 6

Jurisdiction
Where there
are no specialized courts for domestic violence or family matters, the
mixed or
misdemeanor courts shall be
competent to hear and order the protection measures referred to in
article 3 of this Law.
Those
measures must also be granted by criminal courts, in cases where
the aforementioned offices are unable to provide the service.
In this latter case, they must immediately forward the file to the
corresponding authority. If the described facts constitute a crime, they must
forward certified copies to the Public Prosecutor's Office.
(Thus amended by article 1°
of law
No.
8925 of February 3, 2011)
Article file

Article 7

Legitimate petitioners. The following shall be entitled to request the
protection measures described in the previous chapter:
a) Persons over twelve
years of age affected by a situation of domestic violence.
When minors under twelve years of age or persons with
physical or mental disabilities are involved, the measure must be requested by their
legal representative, the National Children's Trust, a
police authority or an adult.
(Sinalevi note: By means of article 2 section XIII) of the law
approving the Family Procedural Code, No. 9747 of October 23,
2019, the preceding
paragraph shall be amended. In accordance with transitory provision III of the aforementioned
law, said amendment shall enter into force as of
October 1, 2024, so that from that date the new text
shall be as follows: "
a) Minors
affected by a situation of domestic violence. In
cases of minors and persons with disabilities, the
protection measures must also be requested by
their legal representative, the National Children's Trust (PANI), a
police authority or any other person who has knowledge of
the situation of domestic violence.")
b) Public or
private institutions that carry out programs for the protection of
human rights and the family, when the aggrieved person so requests, is
seriously ill or has a disability that prevents him or her from requesting
protection or being aware of the aggression being inflicted.
c) Adults,
when the aggrieved person is unable to request them due to
being seriously ill as a result of a situation of domestic
violence.
(Sinalevi note: By means of article 2 section XIII) of the law
approving the Family Procedural Code, No. 9747 of October 23,
2019, the preceding
paragraph shall be amended. In accordance with transitory provision III of the aforementioned
law, said amendment shall enter into force as of
October 1, 2024, so that from that date the new text
shall be as follows: "
c) Any person,
when there is a serious risk to the life or physical integrity of the
alleged victim or the victim is unable to request the
protection measures on his or her own account, as a result of a
situation of domestic violence.")
Article file

Article 8

Processing
The measures may be requested in
writing or verbally, independently of any other proceeding, whether
criminal or family. The written request shall only require
authentication when the person making it does not present it personally. The
courts shall be empowered to conduct the processing
by applying ex officio procedural impulse.
When there is imminent danger to the
physical integrity of the persons protected by this law, the
judge shall immediately issue the pertinent protection measures, in order to
prevent the harm from occurring or continuing to occur.
In these cases, compliance with formalities shall not become
an impediment to timely intervention.
The request for protection measures
may be submitted on a form to be prepared by the
institutions mentioned in paragraph b) of article 7 of this law.
Article file

Article 9

Requirements of the request
The petitioner for any of the protection
measures indicated in article 3 of this law
must state:
a) The name, surnames, qualifications and
neighborhood of the aggrieved person and the aggressor, if known.
b) The facts on which it is based.
c) The evidence, if any, on which
the facts set forth in the request are based. The failure to indicate
evidence shall not prevent the judicial authority from processing the
request.
d) The protection measures requested.
e) The designation of the house or place
for receiving notifications.
Article file

Article 10

Application of measures
Once the request is filed, the competent authority
shall immediately order the application of any of the requested protection measures. This
resolution must be notified in accordance with

article 177 of the Civil Procedural Code and no appeal shall lie against it

Notwithstanding the provisions of the
preceding paragraph, the court may order, ex officio, the application of other
measures different from those requested.
(The Constitutional Chamber
by resolution
No.
2896 of June 14, 1996,
established that this article is not unconstitutional, in relation to

article 3 paragraph l of this law, insofar as it is understood that ".against the

resolution
of the family judge
imposing provisional alimony in accordance with them, an appeal lies
in one effect only, which must be processed and resolved by the
competent authority according to the special legislation governing alimony matters,
to which the certified copies ordered by this
Law must be immediately forwarded").
Article file

Article 11

Forensic medical examination
When deemed necessary, the assaulted person
or the applicant for the measure, in accordance with the provisions of

article 7 of this law, may request from the

competent authority that a medical and psychological examination be performed to
assess the physical and psychological damages suffered.
This examination may be performed by
professionals from the Department of Legal Medicine of the Judicial Branch or those from the
Costa Rican Social Security Fund and the Ministry of Health.
Article file

Article 12

Appearance
In the event
that the alleged aggressor requests it in writing or verbally,
within five days following notification of the initial order, or that
the alleged victim has a history as an aggressor, the court
shall summon the parties to an oral hearing, at which the relevant
evidence shall be presented.
In
any of those cases, the judicial authority shall immediately set
the date and time of the hearing. That appointment must be notified to the
applicant personally, except when a means for receiving
notifications has been indicated. Between that notification and the holding of the hearing there must
be a period of five days.
When the
victim cannot appear due to a disability or illness, prior to
ruling, the judicial authority shall conduct a judicial inspection, in which
act the interview shall be conducted.
In that
same case, if the assaulted person is not in a condition to attend to their
own interests, the judicial authority must summon the witnesses and
consider their opinion in order to rule.
In justified
cases, the victim may request or the judicial authority may order ex
officio that their appearance be conducted without the alleged
aggressor being present, who shall be informed of what occurred once the statement
is concluded and shall be given the opportunity to respond to it.
(As amended by article 1°
of law
No.
8925 of February 3, 2011
)
Article file

Article 13

Assessment of evidence
To interpret this law, in case of doubt in the
assessment of evidence, the most favorable interpretation
for the alleged victim shall prevail.
Article file

Article 14

Ruling
Once the evidence is presented, the appearance shall
be concluded and the court shall rule immediately on whether the
applied measures remain in effect or not.
The judicial authority shall rule based
on the rules of sound rational criticism and, ex officio, shall govern
procedural initiative; for this purpose it shall order the evidence it deems necessary
in order to establish the truth.
The application and interpretation of
this law shall be governed by the fundamental principles of
family legislation and the provisions contained in

article 10 of the Civil Code

Article file

Article 15

Appeal
The court's ruling may
be appealed within three business days.
However, admitting the appeal shall not
suspend the execution of the decreed measures.
Article file

Article 16

Resolution of the appeal
The superior authority must resolve the
appeal within fifteen days following the
date on which its processing was completed.
Article file

Article 17

Execution of the
measures
The
judicial authority must review the results of the execution of the
measures, either through the appearance of the parties at the corresponding
office, with the frequency ordered, or through the intervention
of the Department of Social Work and Psychology of the Judicial Branch or of
any other state agency required for that purpose, which shall render
periodic reports on the effectiveness of the measures.
The administrative
police have the obligation to monitor the effective compliance with the
protection measures, by all necessary means.
It is
the responsibility of the public agencies that form part of the national system
for the care and prevention of domestic violence, in accordance with
their competencies, to provide comprehensive support to victims of
violence that enables them to improve their situation, as well as recovery and the
construction of a new life project.
The
National Institute for Women (
Inamu
) shall provide
counseling to fulfill that purpose and, in addition, shall offer victims the
support services, legal advice and legal representation
necessary to carry out the procedures contemplated in this Law. For this latter
purpose,
Inamu
may intervene in the
proceeding, in order to guarantee the rights of victims and
legally represent them with the same powers and attributions granted to
the Public Defender in criminal matters
(As amended by article 1°
of law
No.
8925 of February 3, 2011
)
Article file

Article 18

Report
If the facts that motivated the protection measures
constitute a crime, the judicial authority shall take the
provisions it deems appropriate and shall issue testimony to the respective
prosecutor's office.
Article file

Article 19

Supplementary application
The
Code of Civil Procedure shall apply supplementarily in matters not
addressed, where compatible and not contrary to the provisions of this law.
(Sinalevi note: Through article 2 section XIII) of the law that
approves the Family Procedural Code, No. 9747 of October 23,
2019, this article shall be amended. In accordance with transitional provision III
of the aforementioned law, said amendment shall enter into force as of
October 1, 2024, so that from that date the
new text shall be as follows: "

Article 19

Supplementary application. The Family Procedural Code shall apply
supplementarily in matters not addressed, where compatible and not contrary to
the provisions of this law.")
Article file

CHAPTER IV

Obligations of the administrative police

Article 20

Delimitation of competencies
Police authorities have the duty to
intervene in situations of domestic violence, ex officio or when
required by victims or by third parties. In these cases, they must:
a)
Assist
assaulted persons even when they are inside their home.
b)
Detain the
alleged aggressors and place them at the disposal of the competent authority.
In any case, the detained person must be placed at the disposal of the
competent authority within twenty-four hours, as established by

article 37 of the Political Constitution

c)
Prepare a
report on the events that occurred; for this purpose they must gather information from family members,
neighbors or other persons present and record their names, descriptions and
place where they can be located to summon them in a possible judicial proceeding.
d)
Seize weapons and
objects used to intimidate or assault, as well as any other
weapons in the possession of the aggressor or registered in their
name, and place them at the disposal of the respective judicial authority.
For these
purposes and with the aim of protecting human life and personal integrity,
in accordance with articles 21 and 23 of the Political Constitution, the
police authority responding to the initial call is authorized to search the
property where the assault is taking place, in order to locate weapons
to which the aggressor may have access, even if the
aggressor is not present at that location.
(As amended, the previous subsection d) by

article 1° of law No. 9692 of July 9, 2019)

e)
Testify as
witnesses in a possible judicial proceeding.
(As amended by

article 1° of law No. 8925 of February 3, 2011

)
Article file

Article 20 bis- Cancellation of firearm carrying permits.

When dealing with situations of domestic violence, all weapons possessed by the aggressor or registered in their name shall be confiscated and sent to the General Directorate of Armament of the Ministry of Public Security for proper custody.
Once the resolution confirming the protection measures in the domestic violence proceeding has been issued, in accordance with articles 13 to 16 of this law and provided that the judicial authority determines that violent conduct occurred or that there is a risk to the victim or their family, it shall notify the Department of Arms and Explosives Control to initiate the administrative procedure aimed at canceling the registration of the firearms.
(Thus added by article 1 of law No. 9692 of July 9, 2019)
Article file

Article 20

ter- Destruction of firearms. The Department of Arms and Explosives Control, once it has received notification of the final resolution referred to in the preceding article, shall immediately initiate the administrative procedure to cancel the registration of the weapons confiscated from the aggressor. Interested persons shall have the right to file the ordinary remedies of revocation and appeal within three working days.
Once the cancellation resolution is final, the Department shall notify the Directorate to proceed with the destruction of the corresponding firearms.
(Thus added by article 1 of law No. 9692 of July 9, 2019)
Article file

CHAPTER V

Duties of the State

Article 21

Governing entity
It shall be the responsibility of the National Center for the Development of Women and the Family
(
*)
to monitor compliance with the Inter-American Convention to Prevent, Punish and Eradicate Violence against Women. To this end, it shall be empowered to be the governing entity for public policies in programs for detection, care, prevention and labor insertion of assaulted persons.
To fulfill the entrusted obligations, the Center (*) shall develop the functions established in the aforementioned Convention, specifically in paragraphs a) and e) of

article 7 and in paragraphs a), b), c), e), g), h), i) of

article 8, in the following terms

1.- It shall ensure that authorities, their officials, personnel and agents of institutions behave in accordance with the obligations stipulated in that Convention.
2.- It shall take appropriate measures to encourage the modification of legal or customary practices that support the persistence or tolerance of violence against persons.
3.- It shall strengthen knowledge and observance of women's right to a life free of violence and to have their rights respected and protected.
4.- It shall promote the modification of sociocultural patterns of conduct of men and women, including the design of formal and informal education programs appropriate for all levels of the educational process, in order to counteract prejudices, customs and all types of practices based on the premise of the inferiority of either gender or on stereotypes for men and women that legitimize or exacerbate violence against persons.
5.- It shall promote the education and training of personnel in the administration of justice, police and other officials responsible for law enforcement, as well as personnel responsible for implementing policies to prevent, punish and eliminate domestic violence.
6.- It shall stimulate educational programs, governmental and private sector, aimed at raising public awareness about problems related to domestic violence, legal remedies and corresponding reparation.
7.- It shall encourage the media to develop appropriate dissemination guidelines and thus contribute to eradicating domestic violence in all its forms and, especially, to enhancing respect for the dignity of women.
8.- It shall guarantee research and compilation of statistics and relevant information on the causes, consequences and frequency of domestic violence, in order to evaluate state measures.
9.- It shall promote international cooperation to exchange ideas and experiences and implement programs aimed at protecting the right to a life without violence.
The State shall endeavor to offer treatment and rehabilitation alternatives to aggressors, taking into account, among others, their dual condition as victims and aggressors.
(*) (Note: According to article 26, paragraph b), of the Law of the National Institute for Women No. 7801 of April 30, 1998, any reference to the National Center for the Development of Women and the Family shall be understood as referring to the National Institute for Women)
Article file

Article 22

National plan
The National Center for the Development of Women and the Family
(
*)
shall develop a national plan that coordinates, as a unified system, the institutions that can offer special services to persons assaulted by gender violence or work to prevent it.
(*) (Note: According to article 26, paragraph b), of the Law of the National Institute for Women No. 7801 of April 30, 1998, any reference to the National Center for the Development of Women and the Family shall be understood as referring to the National Institute for Women)
Article file

Article 23

Obligation of institutions
Public institutions that can collaborate in the detection, care, prevention and labor insertion of assaulted persons are obligated to direct their work to fulfill this purpose.
Article file

Article 24

Coordination of policies
It shall be the responsibility of the governing entities in matters of disability and old age to formulate and coordinate public policies to prevent and address cases of intrafamily violence against disabled persons or persons sixty years of age or older.
(Note from Sinalevi:
Opinion No. 372-2019 of December 13, 2019 concluded that

article 24 of the Law against

Domestic Violence No. 7586 of April 10, 1996, has been tacitly repealed in part.
According to said opinion, there is incongruence or contradiction between

article 24 of law No. 7586 and numeral 2 of the Comprehensive Law for the

Elderly Person No. 7935 of October 25, 1999, given that both norms establish a different age for a person to be considered an elderly adult in our country.
The legal antinomy must be resolved by applying the hermeneutic criteria and, specifically, the chronological criterion which assumes that, in the event of conflict between two norms of equal nature and hierarchy, the later norm must prevail. The effect caused by the application of this criterion is the partial tacit repeal of the earlier norm, that is, of

article 24 of law No. 7586 of April 10,

1996, only insofar as it established the age for a person to be considered part of the third age, or elderly adult, at 60 years or older.
)
Article file

CHAPTER VI

Final provisions

Article 25

Repeals
Paragraph ch) of article 81 and paragraph c) of article 81 bis of the Penal Code are repealed.
Article file

Article 26

Effective date
It takes effect from its publication.
Given at the Presidency of the Republic.-San José, on the tenth day of the month of April nineteen hundred and ninety-six.
Article file
Generation date: 02/13/2024 10:35:16 p.m.
Go to beginning of document

This excerpt sits under: Costa Rican Legal Information System > CHAPTER IV
