REPUBLIC OF COTE D'IVOIRE Union-Discipline-Work

REPUBLIC OF COTE D'IVOIRE Union-Discipline-Work

LAW NO. 2021-894 OF 21 DECEMBER 2021 ON PROTECTION MEASURES FOR VICTIMS OF DOMESTIC VIOLENCE, RAPE AND SEXUAL VIOLENCE OTHER THAN DOMESTIC

THE NATIONAL ASSEMBLY AND THE SENATE have adopted;

THE PRESIDENT OF THE REPUBLIC promulgates the law whose content follows:

Article 1

For the purposes of this law, domestic violence means all acts of violence that occur:

1. within the family or household, committed by one of its members against another member, or against any other person living in the same house as the aggressor, whether or not linked or having been linked to the victim by ties of kinship, by blood or by marriage;

2. between former or current spouses or cohabitants or persons maintaining or having maintained a de facto relationship, regardless of whether the perpetrator of the offence shares or has shared the same domicile as the victim.

Article 2

In the event of domestic violence endangering one of the persons mentioned in the preceding article, the President of the court may issue, as a matter of urgency, a protection order to the victim.

Article 3

The protection order may be obtained upon application presented by any interested person or by the public prosecutor. The latter is required to act ex officio as soon as he becomes aware of the danger to which the victim is exposed by the violence exercised as stated in the preceding article.

When the application does not emanate from the public prosecutor, notice thereof is given to him by the President of the Court seized.

Article 4

The protection order is issued by the President of the territorially competent Court, seized by application.

The territorially competent Court is that of the actual or elected domicile of the defendant and, in the absence of domicile, that of his residence.

In addition to the Court of the defendant's domicile, the Court of the applicant's domicile or residence is also competent.

The issuance of the protection order is not subject to the existence of a prior criminal complaint or to the production of a medical certificate.

Article 5

The protection order is issued by the President of the Court, within twenty-four hours of being seized, if he considers, in view of the elements produced before him, that there are serious reasons to consider as plausible the commission of the alleged acts of violence and the danger to which the victim or the other partner, another member of the family or the same house, or one or more children are exposed.

In this case, the President of the Court may order all measures appropriate to safeguard the rights and interests of the victim of violence or of the person exposed to danger.

Article 6

The President of the Court may, after hearing the parties, retract the orders he has rendered in accordance with the provisions of article 5, in particular when they infringe the rights of third parties.

Upon receipt of the application for retraction of the protection order, the President of the Court summons, by any means leaving a written trace, for a hearing, the applicant party and the defendant party. The parties may be assisted by their lawyers.

The hearing is held in chambers. The judge may, ex officio or at the request of one of the parties, hear the parties and witnesses separately.

The order ruling on the application for retraction is rendered as in summary proceedings.

Article 7

After having gathered the observations of the parties, the President of the Court may:

1. prohibit the defendant party from receiving or meeting certain persons specifically designated in the order, as well as from entering into contact with them, in any manner whatsoever;

2. prohibit the defendant party from going to certain places specifically indicated in which the applicant party is habitually located;

3. prohibit the defendant party from holding or carrying a weapon and, where applicable, order him to hand over to the police or gendarmerie service that he designates, the weapons of which he is the holder with a view to their deposit at the registry;

4. order the separate residence of the spouses; the enjoyment of the matrimonial home is attributed, except by specially reasoned order justified by particular circumstances, to the spouse who is not the perpetrator of the violence; the expenses occasioned by the separate residence may be charged to the violent spouse;

5. rule on the common dwelling of cohabitants; the enjoyment of the common dwelling is attributed, except by specially reasoned order justified by particular circumstances, to the cohabitant who is not the perpetrator of the violence. The expenses occasioned by the separate residence may be charged to the violent cohabitant;

6. rule on the modalities of exercise of parental authority and on the modalities of the right of visit and accommodation, as well as, where applicable, on the contribution to the

charges of the marriage for married couples and on the contribution to the maintenance and education of the children; the right of visit may be limited to a designated meeting space or be exercised in the presence of a trusted third person;

7. authorize the applicant party to conceal his domicile or residence and to elect domicile, for the purposes of everyday life, at his lawyer's office or at the public prosecutor's office.

When the President of the Court issues a protection order relating to one or other of the above-mentioned measures, he informs, without delay, the public prosecutor, to whom he also reports violence likely to endanger one or more children.

Article 8

The measures mentioned in article 6 are taken for a period determined by the President of the Court and take effect from the notification of the order. They may be extended beyond the allotted period if, in the meantime, an application for divorce or legal separation has been filed or if the competent judge has been seized with an application relating to the exercise of parental authority.

The President of the Court may, at any time, at the request of the public prosecutor or one of the parties, or after having carried out any useful investigative measure, and, after having invited each of them to express themselves, remove or modify all or part of the measures set out in the protection order or decide on new ones.

Article 9

The order of the President of the Court is enforceable on minute and before registration. It may be appealed before the First President of the Court of Appeal within a period of ten days, from its pronouncement.

The appeal against the protection order is not suspensive.

Article 10

A protection order may also be issued as a matter of urgency, by the President of the Court:

– to a person threatened with a forced matrimonial union, of a civil, customary or religious nature, under the conditions set out in article 5;

– to a person victim of rape or any other sexual violence in his place of residence;

– to a person whose minor child is a victim of rape or any other sexual, physical or moral violence in his place of residence.

Article 11

In cases of domestic violence, rape or sexual violence other than domestic, regardless of the place of commission, the judicial police officer, upon receipt of the complaint or denunciation, and after having informed the public prosecutor, shall immediately proceed to hear the victim as well as to collect all evidence to clarify the facts and circumstances of their commission.

The judicial police officer shall also proceed to identify the person accused, to hear them and to verify their criminal record.

If deemed necessary, the judicial police officer may directly requisition a doctor to examine the victim and provide them with the urgent care required by their state of health.

The medical examination, upon requisition of the judicial police officer, is a matter of right if the victim or a member of their family requests it.

Article 12

In the cases mentioned in paragraph 1 of the preceding article, the initiation of public prosecution is not subject to the production, by the victim, of a medical certificate.

When no medical certificate is produced in support of a complaint, a denunciation or an investigation report for domestic violence, rape or sexual violence other than domestic, the public prosecutor shall have the necessary technical, scientific or medical findings carried out, by requisition addressed to any qualified person.

In case of dispute, the findings of the medical certificate are submitted, upon requisition, to the opinion of any qualified person listed on the national list of experts, established each year by the Minister of Justice, upon proposal of the Courts of Appeal.

The competent investigating judge, when seized, may also either on their own motion, or at the request of the public prosecutor, or at the request of the parties, order an expert assessment for the purpose of producing the medical certificate.

Article 13

Within the framework of the implementation of this law, the victim who requests it, benefits as of right from legal aid.

The costs related to the requisitions provided for in this law are charged to the costs of criminal, correctional and simple police justice.

Article 14

Anyone who, being subject to an obligation or prohibition imposed by a protection order, does not comply with that obligation or prohibition, is punished by imprisonment of three months to twelve months and a fine of 50,000 to 500,000 francs.

Article 15

This law shall be published in the Official Journal of the Republic of Côte d'Ivoire and executed as law of the State.

Done in Abidjan, on 21 December 2021

Certified true copy of the original The Secretary General of the Government

Alassane OUATTARA

Eliane Atta SIMANASCO

Prefect

NO. 2100923
