The database was updated on 14.02.2024.

The database was updated on 14.02.2024.
up to and including NN 17/24

Article 1

This Act prescribes the rights of victims of domestic violence, the circle of persons to whom the Act applies, determines the forms of domestic violence, misdemeanour sanctions for protection from domestic violence, collection of data on the application of the Act, establishment of the Commission for monitoring and improving the work of criminal and misdemeanour procedure bodies and the execution of sanctions related to protection from domestic violence, and misdemeanour provisions.
5. Protocol on procedure in cases of sexual violence

Article 2

This Act transposes into the legal order of the Republic of Croatia Directive 2012/29/EU of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2012 establishing minimum standards on the rights, support and protection of victims of crime, and replacing Council Framework Decision 2001/220/JHA (OJ L 315, 14. 11. 2012.).

Article 3

The provisions of the law governing misdemeanours and criminal procedure shall apply mutatis mutandis, unless otherwise prescribed by this Act.

Article 4

All bodies acting in cases of domestic violence are obliged to act urgently and all proceedings initiated under this Act are urgent.

Article 5

(1) All bodies acting in cases of domestic violence are obliged to act with particular consideration towards the victim of domestic violence and, when undertaking actions, to take care of the victim's rights in an appropriate manner.
(2) All bodies acting in cases of domestic violence are obliged to act with particular consideration towards a child victim of domestic violence, taking into account their age, personality and personal and family circumstances in order to avoid harmful consequences for the child's upbringing and development. When acting towards a child victim of domestic violence, the competent bodies shall be guided primarily by the best interests of the child.
(3) Bodies acting in cases of domestic violence are obliged to respect the dignity of a person with a disability and an elderly person as a victim of violence and to respect the specificities arising from their disability or age.

Article 6

(1) A victim of domestic violence has the following rights:
1. the right to access services for support of victims of domestic violence
2. the right to effective psychological and other professional assistance and support from bodies, organisations or institutions for assistance to victims of domestic violence
3. the right to protection from intimidation and retaliation
4. the right to protection of dignity during examination of the victim as a witness
5. the right to be accompanied by a person of trust when undertaking all actions in which they participate
6. the right to be informed, at their request, without undue delay, of the lifting of detention or escape of the accused and the annulment of decisions imposing protective measures and the lifting of precautionary measures determined for their protection or the release of a convicted person from serving a prison sentence
7. the right to confidentiality of data whose disclosure could endanger their safety or the safety of persons referred to in Article 8 paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Act and the right to request exclusion of the public in court proceedings
8. the right to a representative in proceedings
9. the right, at their own request, to be informed of actions taken following a report and of the outcome of the proceedings
10. the right to be examined without unjustified delay after filing a report, the right to request to be examined in court proceedings and the right that further examinations be conducted only to the extent necessary for the purposes of misdemeanour proceedings
11. the right to be examined at the police station by a person of the same sex
12. the right to avoid contact with the perpetrator before and during proceedings, unless the misdemeanour proceedings require such contact
13. the right to temporary accommodation in an appropriate institution in accordance with a special law
14. the right to police protection and security, by court order, for the purpose of unhindered collection of personal belongings when leaving the common household
15. other rights prescribed by the law governing criminal procedure, except those rights which by their nature can only be held by a victim of a criminal offence.
(2) Bodies acting in cases of domestic violence are obliged, already when undertaking the first action in which the victim participates, to inform the victim in a manner understandable to them of all rights they have in accordance with the provisions of this Act and the law governing criminal procedure.
(3) The bodies referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article are obliged to ensure that the victim has understood the information given about their rights.
(4) In cases where it is necessary to examine a child victim of domestic violence, the bodies referred to in paragraph 2 of this Article are obliged to examine the child victim by applying the provisions of the law governing criminal procedure on the special manner of examining children.
(5) If the child is a victim of domestic violence and the interests of the child are in conflict with the interests of the parents, the competent body shall call upon the competent social welfare body to appoint a special guardian. The special guardian is authorised to make all statements and undertake all actions that the victim is authorised to make. By way of exception, a child victim of domestic violence who has reached the age of 16 may independently make statements and undertake actions in proceedings.
(6) If the victim of domestic violence is a child, the information referred to in paragraph 1 points 6 and 9 of this Article shall be given ex officio.

Article 7

(1) Health workers, employees in social welfare institutions, persons employed in educational institutions, professional workers employed in religious institutions, humanitarian organisations or civil society organisations and all other professional persons who in their work come into contact with victims of domestic violence are obliged to report to the police or the state attorney's office the commission of domestic violence of which they became aware in the performance of their duties.
(2) Bodies acting in cases of domestic violence are obliged to inform the competent social welfare centre without delay of the facts and circumstances that contributed to or favoured the commission of domestic violence, for the purpose of taking measures within the competence of the social welfare centre.
(1) The persons to whom this Act applies are: spouse, extramarital partner, life partner, informal life partner, their common children and the children of each of them, blood relatives in the direct line, relatives in the collateral line up to and including the third degree, relatives by affinity
up to and including the second degree, adopter and adoptee.
(2) The provisions of this Act also apply to a former spouse, former extramarital partner, former life partner, former informal life partner, current or former partner in an intimate relationship, persons who have a common child and persons living in a common household.
(3) Persons with disabilities and elderly persons referred to in paragraphs 1 and 2 of this Article as victims of domestic violence enjoy special protection under this Act.
(4) An extramarital partner is a person living in an extramarital union of a more permanent nature or lasting a shorter time if a common child was born in it.
(5) An informal life partner within the meaning of this Act is a person living in a same-sex union of a more permanent nature.
(6) A child is a person who has not reached the age of eighteen.
(7) A victim of domestic violence is a person who, due to the commission of domestic violence, suffers physical or psychological consequences, property damage or a substantial violation of fundamental rights and freedoms.
(8) A person of trust is a legal representative or another adult person chosen by the victim of domestic violence, unless proposed or called as a witness.
(9) A person with a disability is a person who has long-term physical, mental, intellectual or sensory impairments which in interaction with various barriers may hinder their full and effective participation in society on an equal basis with others.
(10) An elderly person is a person aged 65 years and over.

Article 9

Terms used in this Act that have gender significance are used neutrally and refer equally to the male and female sex.

Article 10 (NN 126/19)

Domestic violence is:
1. application of physical force as a result of which no bodily injury occurred
2. corporal punishment or other forms of degrading treatment of children
3. psychological violence which has caused injury to the victim's dignity or distress
4. sexual harassment
5. economic violence as prohibition or prevention of the use of joint or personal property, disposal of personal income or property acquired through personal work or inheritance, prevention of employment, withholding of funds for maintaining the joint household and for the care of children
6. neglect of the needs of a person with a disability or an elderly person which leads to their distress or offends their dignity and thereby causes them physical or mental suffering.
CASE LAW: Judgment, Judgment, Judgment
Types and purpose of misdemeanour sanctions for protection against domestic violence

Article 11

(1) Misdemeanour sanctions for protection against domestic violence are protective measures, monetary fine, imprisonment and other misdemeanour sanctions prescribed by the law governing misdemeanours.
(2) The purpose of misdemeanour sanctions is the protection of family members exposed to violence, respect for the legal system and prevention of repeated commission of domestic violence through appropriate sanctioning of the misdemeanour perpetrator.
Protective measures

Article 12

(1) The purpose of protective measures is to prevent domestic violence, ensure the protection of the health and safety of the victim of domestic violence and eliminate circumstances that favour or encourage the commission of a new misdemeanour, and they are imposed in order to eliminate the endangerment of the victim of domestic violence.
(2) Protective measures may be imposed independently and without imposing a penalty or other misdemeanour sanction.
(3) Protective measures may be imposed ex officio, on the proposal of the authorised prosecutor, the victim or the social welfare centre.
(4) On the proposal of the victim or another authorised prosecutor, the court may, even before the expiry of the time for which the protective measure was imposed, review the justification for the further course of the imposed protective measure and, if necessary, may replace the imposed protective measure with another or revoke it.
Types of protective measures

Article 13

The court may impose on the perpetrator of domestic violence, in addition to the protective measures prescribed by the Misdemeanour Act, the following protective measures:
1. mandatory psychosocial treatment
2. prohibition of approaching, harassing or stalking the victim of domestic violence
3. removal from the joint household
4. mandatory treatment for addiction.

Article 14

(1) The court may impose the protective measures from Article 13 points 2 and 3 of this Act before initiating misdemeanour proceedings on the proposal of the victim or another authorised prosecutor if there is a direct danger to the safety of the victim or members of their family or a member of the joint household.
(2) The court shall issue the decision from paragraph 1 of this Article without delay, and at the latest within twenty-four hours from the submission of the proposal. The court shall issue the decision after hearing the victim and the person against whom the imposition of the protective measure is sought. An appeal does not postpone the execution of the decision.
(3) The court shall deliver the decision from paragraph 1 of this Article without delay to the competent police station for the implementation of the imposed protective measure.
(4) The court shall revoke the decision from paragraph 1 of this Article if the victim or another authorised prosecutor does not submit an indictment proposal within eight days from the date of issuing the decision, about which they are obliged to warn the victim. The court shall inform the police without delay about the revocation of the protective measure.
Mandatory psychosocial treatment

Article 15

(1) The protective measure of mandatory psychosocial treatment may be imposed on the perpetrator of domestic violence in order to eliminate their violent behaviour or if there is a danger that they might repeat domestic violence.
(2) The measure from paragraph 1 of this Article may be determined for a duration of at least six months.
(3) The minister responsible for justice affairs shall prescribe by regulation the manner and place of implementation of the measure from paragraph 1 of this Article.
7. Regulation on the implementation of the protective measure of mandatory psychosocial treatment
Prohibition of approaching, harassing or stalking the victim

Article 16

(1) The protective measure of prohibition of approaching, harassing or stalking the victim may be imposed on the perpetrator of domestic violence if there is a danger that the perpetrator might repeat domestic violence against that person.
(2) In the decision by which the court imposes the measure from paragraph 1 of this Article, the places or areas and the distance below which the perpetrator must not approach the victim of domestic violence shall be determined, or harassment or stalking of the victim shall be prohibited.
(3) The measure from paragraph 1 of this Article may not be shorter than one month nor longer than two years.
(4) The court shall deliver the decision by which it imposes the measure from paragraph 1 of this Article without delay to the competent police station for the supervision of the implementation of the imposed protective measure.
(5) The minister responsible for internal affairs shall prescribe by regulation the manner of implementation of the measure from paragraph 1 of this Article.
Removal from the joint household

Article 17

(1) The protective measure of removal from the joint household may be imposed on the perpetrator of domestic violence who committed violence against a family member with whom they live in an apartment, house or some other residential space that constitutes a joint household if there is a danger that they might repeat domestic violence.
(2) The measure from paragraph 1 of this Article may not be shorter than one month nor longer than two years.
(3) The court shall deliver the decision by which it imposes the measure from paragraph 1 of this Article without delay to the competent police station for the supervision of the implementation of the imposed protective measure.
(4) The minister responsible for internal affairs shall prescribe by regulation the manner of implementation of the measure from paragraph 1 of this Article.
Mandatory treatment for addiction

Article 18

(1) The protective measure of mandatory treatment for addiction may be imposed on the perpetrator of domestic violence who committed violence under the influence of addiction to alcohol, drugs or another type of addiction if there is a danger that they will repeat domestic violence due to that addiction.
(2) The measure from paragraph 1 of this Article is determined for a duration that may not be longer than one year.
(3) The minister responsible for health affairs shall prescribe by regulation the manner of implementation of the measure from paragraph 1 of this Article.
6. Regulation on the manner of implementation of the protective measure of mandatory treatment for addiction
CASE LAW: Judgment
Compliance with protective measures

Article 19

(1) The perpetrator of domestic violence is obliged to comply with the imposed protective measure.
(2) Persons from Article 7 paragraph 1 of this Act who, in the performance of their duties, learn that the perpetrator of domestic violence is not complying with the imposed protective measure are obliged to inform the police thereof.

Article 20 (NN 126/19)

(1) The ministry responsible for justice affairs, the ministry responsible for social welfare affairs, the ministry responsible for internal affairs, the ministry responsible for health affairs and the ministry responsible for education affairs are obliged to collect data on the application of this Act and the Criminal Code and, based on the collected data, compile annual reports from their respective fields and submit them to the Commission from Article 21 of this Act by the end of March of the current year for the previous year.
(2) The minister responsible for justice affairs shall prescribe by regulation the manner of collecting, processing and submitting statistical data and reports compiled based on the collected data.

Article 21 (NN 126/19)

(1) The Commission for Monitoring and Improving the Work of Criminal and Misdemeanour Procedure Bodies and the Execution of Sanctions Related to Protection from Domestic Violence (hereinafter: the Commission) shall be established at the ministry responsible for judicial affairs.
(2) The Commission shall have 11 members who shall be elected from among judges, state attorneys, lawyers, civil servants of the ministry responsible for internal affairs, civil servants of the ministry responsible for judicial affairs, civil servants of the ministry responsible for social welfare affairs, civil servants of the ministry responsible for health affairs, civil servants of the ministry responsible for education affairs and representatives of civil society.
(3) The Commission shall collect reports from the competent bodies, in accordance with Article 20, paragraph 1 of this Act, consider the submitted reports and monitor the situation on the basis thereof. Based on the collected reports and other necessary data, the Commission shall prepare an annual report on the application of this Act and provide proposals and opinions in relation to the application of this Act and the Criminal Code.
(4) The Commission shall submit the annual report to the ministry responsible for judicial affairs and it shall then be published on the website of the ministry responsible for judicial affairs by the end of June of the current year for the previous year.
(5) The President and members of the Commission shall be appointed by decision of the minister responsible for judicial affairs for a term of four years.
(6) The minister responsible for judicial affairs shall adopt the rules of procedure on the work of the Commission.
(7) The coordination of the work of the Commission and administrative tasks for the Commission shall be performed by the ministry responsible for judicial affairs.

Article 22 (NN 126/19, 114/22)

(1) Whoever commits violence under Article 10 of this Act shall be punished for a misdemeanour by a fine in the amount of at least 260.00 euros or imprisonment of up to 90 days.
(2) Whoever repeats the violence from paragraph 1 of this Article shall be punished for a misdemeanour by a fine in the amount of at least 790.00 euros or imprisonment for a term of at least 30 days.
(3) Whoever commits violence under Article 10 of this Act in the presence of a child or a person with a disability or an elderly person shall be punished for a misdemeanour by a fine in the amount of at least 920.00 euros or imprisonment for a term of at least 45 days.
(4) Whoever repeats domestic violence from paragraph 3 of this Article shall be punished for a misdemeanour by a fine in the amount of at least 1060.00 euros or imprisonment for a term of at least 60 days.
(5) If the violence from paragraph 1 of this Article is committed to the detriment of a child or a person with a disability or an elderly person, the perpetrator shall be punished for a misdemeanour by a fine in the amount of at least 1590.00 euros or imprisonment for a term of at least 70 days.
(6) Whoever repeats domestic violence from paragraph 5 of this Article shall be punished for a misdemeanour by a fine in the amount of at least 2250.00 euros or imprisonment for a term of at least 80 days.
SUDSKA PRAKSA: Presuda, Presuda

Article 23 (NN 126/19, 114/22)

Persons from Article 7, paragraph 1 of this Act who do not report to the police or the state attorney's office the commission of domestic violence of which they became aware in the performance of their duties shall be punished by a fine in the amount of at least 390.00 euros to 1320.00 euros.

Article 24 (NN 114/22)

A perpetrator of domestic violence who does not act in accordance with the imposed protective measure shall be punished for a misdemeanour by a fine in the amount of at least 390.00 euros or imprisonment of at least ten days.

Article 25

Administrative supervision over the implementation of this Act shall be carried out by the ministry responsible for judicial affairs.

Article 26

Proceedings initiated before the entry into force of this Act shall be completed in accordance with the provisions of this Act.

Article 27

(1) The minister responsible for judicial affairs shall adopt within 30 days from the date of entry into force of this Act the regulations from Article 15, paragraph 3 and Article 20, paragraph 2 of this Act.
(2) The minister responsible for internal affairs shall adopt within 30 days from the date of entry into force of this Act the regulations from Article 16, paragraph 5 and Article 17, paragraph 4 of this Act.
(3) The minister responsible for health affairs shall adopt within 30 days from the date of entry into force of this Act the regulation from Article 18, paragraph 3 of this Act.
(4) The minister responsible for judicial affairs shall appoint the Commission and adopt the rules of procedure from Article 21, paragraph 6 of this Act within 30 days from the date of entry into force of this Act.
7. Pravilnik o provođenju zaštitne mjere obveznog psihosocijalnog tretmana

Article 28

The Commission for Monitoring and Improving the Work of Criminal and Misdemeanour Procedure Bodies and the Execution of Sanctions Related to Protection from Domestic Violence established on the basis of the provisions of the Act on Protection from Domestic Violence ("Narodne novine", Nos. 137/09, 14/20 and 60/10) shall continue its work until the establishment of the Commission in accordance with the provisions of this Act.

Article 29

Until the entry into force of the implementing regulations from Article 27, paragraphs 1, 2 and 3 of this Act, the implementing regulations adopted on the basis of the Act on Protection from Domestic Violence ("Narodne novine", No. 116/03) and the Act on Protection from Domestic Violence ("Narodne novine", Nos. 137/09, 14/10 and 60/10) shall remain in force:
– Pravilnik o načinu i mjestu provođenja psihosocijalnog tretmana ("Narodne novine", Nos. 29/05 and 78/06)
– Pravilnik o načinu provedbe zaštitnih mjera koje su Zakonom o zaštiti od nasilja u obitelji stavljene u nadležnost policije ("Narodne novine", No. 27/04)
– Pravilnik o sadržaju obvezne evidencije i izvješća, načinu prikupljanja, obrade i pohrane statističkih podataka iz područja primjene Zakona o zaštiti od nasilja u obitelji ("Narodne novine", No. 105/11).

Article 30

Upon the entry into force of this Act, the Act on Protection from Domestic Violence ("Narodne novine", Nos. 137/09, 14/10 and 60/10) shall cease to be valid.

Article 31

This Act shall be published in "Narodne novine" and shall enter into force on 1 January 2018.

Article 7

This Act shall be published in "Narodne novine" and shall enter into force on 1 January 2020.

Article 4

This Act shall be published in "Narodne novine" and shall enter into force on the day of introduction of the euro as the official currency in the Republic of Croatia.

This excerpt sits under: Baza je ažurirana 14.02.2024.
