Print date: 14 February 2024

Print date: 14 February 2024

LBK no. 1028 of 22/08/2013 (Historical)
Promulgation of the Criminal Code

Subsequent amendments to the regulation

LOV no. 1620 of 26/12/2013 ­ LOV no. 168 of 26/02/2014 ­ LOV no. 403 of 28/04/2014 § 3 ­ LOV no. 516 of 26/05/2014 § 2 ­

LOV no. 733 of 25/06/2014 § 1 ­ LOV no. 739 of 25/06/2014 § 1 ­ LBK no. 871 of 04/07/2014

Promulgation of the Criminal Code

Hereby is promulgated the Criminal Code, cf. Consolidation Act no. 1007 of 24 October 2012, with the amendments following from § 2 of Act no. 1242 of 18 December 2012, § 2 of Act no. 1385 of 23 December 2012, § 2 of
Act no. 431 of 1 May 2013, § 1 of Act no. 434 of 1 May 2013, § 1 of Act no. 628 of 12 June 2013, § 1 of Act no.
633 of 12 June 2013, § 1 of Act no. 634 of 12 June 2013 and § 3 of Act no. 642 of 12 June 2013.
General Part
Chapter 1
Introductory provisions

§ 1

Punishment may only be imposed for an act the punishability of which is provided for by law or which must be entirely equated with such an act. With regard to the legal consequences mentioned in Chapter 9, a corresponding rule applies.

§ 2

Chapters 1-11 of this Act apply, unless otherwise provided, to all punishable acts.
Chapter 2
General conditions for the application of criminal law provisions

§ 3

If the criminal legislation in force at the adjudication of an act differs from that which was in force at the commission of the act, the question of punishability and punishment shall be decided according to the later law, provided, however, that the decision shall not thereby become more severe than under the earlier law. If the cessation of the validity of the law is due to external circumstances unrelated to culpability, the act shall be assessed according to the earlier law.
Stk. 2. If, outside the latter case, the punishability of an act ceases by law, the punishment imposed for such an act but not executed shall also cease. The convicted person may request that the question of the cessation of the punishment be brought before the court which adjudicated the case at first instance by the prosecution authority. The decision shall be made by order.

§ 4

Whether the punishable act shall result in legal consequences of the kind mentioned in §§ 56-61, 62-70, 73 and 79 shall be decided according to the legislation in force at the adjudication of the act.
Stk. 2. Other legal consequences of the act shall, unless otherwise provided, only occur if this was also provided for by the legislation in force at the commission of the act.
Stk. 3. The provision in § 3, subsection 2, applies correspondingly to legal consequences of the act other than punishment if their occurrence was conditional upon the punishability of the act.

§ 5

Where increased punishment or other legal consequences are prescribed in cases of recidivism, decisions made pursuant to earlier law shall be taken into account according to their content on equal terms with decisions pursuant to the law under which the present act is assessed.

§ 6. Under Danish criminal jurisdiction are acts which are committed

1)	in the Danish State,
2)	on a Danish vessel which is located within a foreign jurisdiction, by a person who belongs to the vessel or accompanies it as a passenger, or
3)	on a Danish vessel which is located outside a jurisdiction.

§ 7

Under Danish criminal jurisdiction are acts which are committed within a foreign jurisdiction by a person who at the time of the charge has Danish nationality, is resident in the Danish State or has similar permanent residence in this country, if
1)	the act is also punishable under the legislation at the place of commission (double criminality) or
2)	the perpetrator also at the time of commission has the said connection to this country and the act

a)	comprises sexual exploitation of children, human trafficking or female circumcision or
b)	is directed against someone who at the time of commission has the said connection to this country.
Stk. 2. Under Danish criminal jurisdiction are furthermore acts which are committed outside a jurisdiction by a person who at the time of the charge has the connection to this country mentioned in subsection 1, if acts of the kind in question may result in a punishment higher than imprisonment for 4 months.
Stk. 3. Subsection 1, no. 1, and subsection 2 apply correspondingly with regard to acts committed by a person who at the time of the charge has nationality or is resident in Finland, Iceland, Norway or Sweden and who is present in this country.

§ 7

a. Under Danish criminal jurisdiction are acts which are committed within a foreign jurisdiction and which are directed against someone who at the time of commission has Danish nationality, is resident in the Danish State or has similar permanent residence in this country, if the act is also punishable under the legislation at the place of commission (double criminality) and under Danish legislation may result in a punishment of imprisonment for at least 6 years.
Stk. 2. Danish criminal jurisdiction pursuant to subsection 1 is conditional upon the act comprising
1)	intentional homicide,
2)	serious violence, deprivation of liberty or robbery,
3)	a crime dangerous to the public,
4)	a sexual offence or incest or
5)	female circumcision.
Stk. 3. Under Danish criminal jurisdiction are furthermore acts which are committed outside a jurisdiction and which are directed against someone who at the time of commission has the connection to this country mentioned in subsection 1, if acts of the kind in question may result in a punishment higher than imprisonment for 4 months.

§ 7

b. When Danish criminal jurisdiction over a legal person is conditional upon double criminality, this does not include a requirement that the legislation at the place of commission provides for criminal liability for a legal person.

§ 8

Under Danish criminal jurisdiction are acts which are committed outside the Danish State, regardless of where the perpetrator belongs, when
1)	the act violates the independence, security, constitution or public authorities of the Danish State or an official duty towards the State,
2)	the act violates interests whose legal protection in the Danish State presupposes a special connection to it,
3)	the act violates an obligation which according to law the perpetrator is required to observe abroad,
4)	the act violates a duty of service which the perpetrator owes to a Danish vessel,
5)	the act is covered by an international provision according to which Denmark is obliged to have criminal jurisdiction, or
6)	extradition of the accused for prosecution in another country is refused and the act, insofar as it is committed within a foreign jurisdiction, is punishable under the legislation at the place of commission (double criminality) and the act under Danish legislation may result in a punishment of imprisonment for at least 1 year.

§ 8

a. Under Danish criminal jurisdiction are acts which are committed outside the Danish State when acts of the kind in question are covered by the Statute of the International Criminal Court, if the act is committed by a person who at the time of the charge
1)	has Danish nationality, is resident in the Danish State or has similar permanent residence in this country or
2)	is present in this country.

§ 8

b. Under Danish criminal jurisdiction are acts which are committed outside the Danish State when the act is covered by § 183 a and is committed by a person who at the time of the charge
1)	has Danish nationality, is resident in the Danish State or has similar permanent residence in this country or

2)	is present in this country.
Stk. 2. Prosecution for acts covered by subsection 1 may also include violations of §§ 237 and 244-248 which are committed in connection with the violation of § 183 a.

§ 9

Acts are considered committed where the perpetrator was located at the time of committing the act. With regard to legal persons, acts are considered committed where the act or acts that entail liability for the legal person were committed.
Subsection 2. If the punishability of an act depends on or is affected by an occurred or intended consequence, the act is also considered committed where the effect occurred, or where the perpetrator had intent that the effect should occur.
Subsection 3. Attempt and complicity acts are considered committed in the Danish state if the perpetrator was located in this country at the time of committing the act, regardless of whether the offence is completed or intended to be completed outside the Danish state.
Subsection 4. When part of an offence has been committed in the Danish state, the offence in its entirety is considered to have been committed in this country.

§ 9

a. An offence concerning text, sound or image material etc., which by acts abroad has been made generally accessible in this country through the internet or a similar system for dissemination of information, is considered committed in the Danish state if the material has a special connection to this country.

§ 10

When an act is prosecuted in this country, the decision on both punishment and other legal consequences of the act shall be made according to Danish legislation.
Subsection 2. When Danish criminal jurisdiction is conditional on double criminality, no more severe punishment may be imposed than provided for by the legislation at the place of commission.

§ 10

a. A person against whom a criminal sentence has been passed outside the Danish state cannot be prosecuted in this country for the same act when this is excluded pursuant to Denmark's international obligations concerning recognition of the legal effect of criminal sentences.
Subsection 2. In other cases, a person against whom a criminal sentence has been passed outside the Danish state cannot be prosecuted in this country for the same act if
1)	the person has been finally acquitted,
2)	the imposed sanction has been enforced, is being enforced or has lapsed according to the legislation in the country of judgment or
3)	the person has been found guilty without any sanction being imposed.
Subsection 3. Subsection 2 does not apply when
1)	the foreign criminal sentence concerns acts that
a)	are considered committed in the Danish state pursuant to § 9 or § 9 a or
b)	are covered by § 7, subsection 1, no. 2, or § 8, no. 1 or 2,
2)	prosecution in this country takes place pursuant to the Administration of Justice Act § 985 a or
3)	recognition of the foreign criminal sentence would be manifestly incompatible with Danish legal principles.
Subsection 4. In the cases mentioned in subsection 3, no. 1, prosecution in this country cannot take place when prosecution in the country of judgment has taken place at the request of the Danish prosecution authority.

§ 10

b. If prosecution takes place against a person who outside the Danish state has been imposed a sanction for the same act, the sanction imposed in this country shall be reduced to the extent that the foreign sanction has been enforced.

§ 11

If a person who has Danish citizenship, is resident in the Danish state or has similar permanent residence in this country, has been punished in a foreign state for an act that under Danish law may result in disqualification or forfeiture of vocation or occupation or other right, disqualification thereof may take place following public prosecution in this country.

§ 12

The application of §§ 6-11 is limited by the exceptions recognized in international law.
3.	Chapter
Conditions of punishability

§ 13

Acts committed in self-defence are not punishable insofar as they have been necessary to resist or avert a commenced or imminent unlawful attack and do not manifestly exceed what, having regard to the danger of the attack, the attacker's person and the importance of the legal interest attacked, is justifiable.
Subsection 2. If anyone exceeds the limits of lawful self-defence, he nevertheless becomes exempt from punishment if the excess is reasonably justified by the fear or agitation caused by the attack.
Subsection 3. Corresponding rules apply to acts that are necessary to lawfully secure compliance with lawful orders, effect a lawful arrest or prevent the escape of a prisoner or compulsorily placed person.

§ 14

An act that would otherwise be punishable is not punished when it was necessary to avert a threatening harm to person or property, and the offence must be considered to be of relatively minor importance.

§ 15. Acts committed by children under 15 years of age are not punished

§ 16

Persons who at the time of the act were not accountable due to mental illness or conditions that must be equated therewith are not punished. The same applies to persons who were mentally retarded to a higher degree. If the perpetrator was temporarily in a state of mental illness or in a state that must be equated therewith as a result of consumption of alcohol or other intoxicants, punishment may however be imposed when special circumstances argue for it.
Subsection 2. Persons who at the time of the act were mentally retarded to a lesser degree are not punished unless special circumstances argue for imposing punishment. The same applies to persons who were in a condition that must be entirely equated with mental retardation.

§§ 17-18. (Repealed)

§ 19

Negligence is punished in the offences covered by this Act only when it is specifically provided for. For other offences, the relevant penal provisions are applicable also when the offence has been committed by negligence, unless the contrary is specifically provided for.

§ 20

Where punishment or increased punishment is conditional on an intentional offence having a specific unintentional consequence, this punishment only applies when such consequence can be attributed to the perpetrator as negligent, or he has failed to the best of his ability to avert it after he has become aware of the danger.
4.	Chapter
Attempt and complicity

§ 21

Acts that aim to promote or bring about the commission of a crime are punished, when it is not completed, as attempt.
Subsection 2. The punishment prescribed for the offence may be reduced for attempt, particularly when the attempt evidences little strength or firmness in the criminal intent.
Subsection 3. Unless otherwise provided, attempt is only punished when a punishment exceeding imprisonment for 4 months may be imposed for the offence.

§ 22

Attempt is not punished when the perpetrator voluntarily and not due to accidental obstacles to the commission of the act or to the achievement of the objective intended thereby desists from the implementation or prevents the completion or performs acts that would have prevented the completion if this had not, unknown to him, failed or been averted by other means.

§ 23

The penal provision given for an offence covers all who by instigation, advice or deed have contributed to the act. The punishment may be reduced for anyone who only intended to provide less significant assistance or strengthen an already formed intent, and when the crime has not been completed or an intended complicity has failed.
Subsection 2. The punishment may likewise be reduced for anyone who contributes to the violation of a special duty relationship but himself stands outside this.
Subsection 3. Unless otherwise provided, punishment for complicity in offences that are not punished with a punishment higher than imprisonment for 4 months may be omitted when the accomplice only intended to provide less significant assistance or strengthen an already formed intent, and when his complicity is due to negligence.

§ 24

The accomplice is not punished if he under the conditions specified in § 22 prevents the completion or performs acts that would have prevented the completion if this had not, unknown to him, failed or been averted by other means.
5.	Chapter
Criminal liability for legal persons

§ 25

A legal person may be punished with a fine when it is provided by or pursuant to law.

§ 26

Provisions on criminal liability for companies etc. cover, unless otherwise determined, any legal person, including limited liability companies, private limited companies and cooperative societies, partnerships, associations, foundations, estates, municipalities and state authorities.
Subsection 2. Furthermore, such provisions cover sole proprietorships, insofar as these, particularly having regard to their size and organisation, can be equated with the companies mentioned in subsection 1.

§ 27

Criminal liability for a legal person presupposes that within its business an offence has been committed which can be attributed to one or more persons connected to the legal person or to the legal person as such. As regards punishment for attempt, section 21, subsection 3, applies correspondingly.
Subsection 2. State authorities and municipalities can only be punished in connection with offences committed in the exercise of activities that correspond to or can be equated with activities exercised by private parties.

§§ 28-30. (Repealed)

6.	Chapter
Punishments

§ 31. The ordinary punishments are imprisonment and fines

§ 32. (Repealed)

§ 33

Imprisonment is imposed for life or for a term, not less than 7 days and not more than 16 years.
Subsection 2. In cases where there is authority to increase the punishment prescribed for an offence, imprisonment of up to 20 years may, however, be imposed.
Subsection 3. An offender who had not reached the age of 18 when the act was committed cannot be sentenced to imprisonment for life.
Subsection 4. When imprisonment is imposed for less than 3 months, the punishment is fixed in days, otherwise in months and years.

§§ 34-37. (Repealed)

§ 38

When two thirds of the term of punishment, but at least 2 months, has been served, the Minister of Justice or a person authorised by him decides whether the convicted person shall be released on probation.

Subsection 2. Release on probation may take place earlier when special circumstances speak in favour thereof and the convicted person has served half of the term of punishment, but at least 2 months. Decision on this is made by the Minister of Justice or a person whom he authorises with respect to specific groups of cases.
Subsection 3. Probation release cannot take place with respect to the unconditional part of a sentence under section 58, subsection 1.
Subsection 4. Release on probation presupposes that the convicted person's circumstances do not make release inadvisable, that suitable accommodation and work or other means of support has been secured for him, and that he declares his willingness to comply with the conditions for release which are laid down pursuant to section 39, subsection 2.

§ 39

Release is conditional upon the person concerned not committing a criminal offence during the probation period. The probation period cannot exceed 3 years. If the remaining term of punishment exceeds 3 years, however, a probation period of up to 5 years may be fixed.
Subsection 2. It may be laid down as a condition for release that the person concerned shall be subject to supervision during the whole probation period or part thereof. Further conditions may be laid down pursuant to the rules in section 57. A condition concerning residence in a home, hospital or other institution has no validity for a longer period than the remaining term of punishment.

§ 40

If the person released on probation commits a new criminal offence during the probation period and, before its expiry, procedural steps are taken whereby he is charged with the offence, the court makes a decision in accordance with section 61, subsection 2, so that the remaining sentence is treated as a suspended sentence. If probation release pursuant to section 40 a, subsection 3 or 4, has been combined with a condition of community service, account shall be taken of the extent of the community service performed when fixing a combined sentence.
Subsection 2. If the person released on probation otherwise violates the conditions laid down, the Minister of Justice may
1)	issue a warning,
2)	alter the conditions and extend the probation period within the maximum period laid down in section 39, or
3)	in special circumstances decide that he shall be committed to serve the remaining sentence.
Subsection 3. If the person released on probation commits a criminal offence during the probation period without prosecution being brought for it, the rules in subsection 2 apply correspondingly. The same applies if the person released on probation is convicted abroad of a criminal offence committed during the probation period without the question of enforcement of the remaining sentence having been addressed in connection with the conviction.
Subsection 4. A decision pursuant to subsection 2, cf. subsection 3, can only be made before the expiry of the probation period.
Subsection 5. If no decision is made on enforcement of the remaining sentence pursuant to subsection 1 or subsection 2, cf. subsection 3, the sentence is deemed to have been served at the time when probation release took place.
Subsection 6. If recommitment has been decided pursuant to subsection 2, cf. subsection 3, renewed probation release may take place even if the temporal conditions in section 38, subsections 1 and 2, or section 40 a, subsection 1, are not fulfilled with respect to the remaining sentence. When making a decision pursuant to the 1st sentence, account shall be taken of the extent of community service which the person concerned has performed pursuant to section 40 a, subsection 3 or 4. With respect to the probation period following such probation release, the periods laid down in section 39 apply with deduction of the time during which the person concerned was previously released on probation.

§ 40

a. When half of the term of punishment, but at least 2 months, has been served, the Minister of Justice or a person authorised by the Minister may, in addition to the cases mentioned in section 38, subsection 2, decide that the convicted person shall be released on probation if regard for the enforcement of the law is deemed not to speak against it, and
1)	the convicted person has made a special effort not to commit crime again, including by participating in treatment programmes, educational programmes, work training or work, or
2)	the convicted person's circumstances speak in favour thereof.
Subsection 2. It is laid down as a condition for probation release pursuant to subsection 1 that the convicted person shall be subject to supervision until the time when two thirds of the term of punishment has elapsed. After this time, a condition may be laid down that the person concerned continues to be subject to supervision.
Subsection 3. As a condition for probation release pursuant to subsection 1, no. 1, one or more further conditions may be laid down pursuant to the rules in section 57 and a condition that the convicted person shall perform unpaid community service.

Subsection 4. As a condition for probation release pursuant to subsection 1, no. 2, it is laid down that the convicted person shall perform unpaid community service. Further conditions may be laid down pursuant to the rules in section 57.
Subsection 5. A condition of community service cannot extend beyond two thirds of the term of punishment. The supervisory authority may, however, decide that a condition of community service shall have a duration beyond this time if special reasons speak in favour thereof, but not beyond the total term of punishment.
Subsection 6. Probation release pursuant to this provision presupposes that the convicted person's circumstances do not make release inadvisable, that suitable accommodation and work or other means of support has been secured for the convicted person, and that the convicted person is suitable for and declares his willingness to comply with the conditions for release which are laid down pursuant to subsections 3 and 4.
Subsection 7. The provisions in section 38, subsection 3, section 39, subsection 1 and subsection 2, 3rd sentence, section 40 and section 63, subsection 1, 1st sentence, apply correspondingly.

§ 41

When 12 years of a sentence of imprisonment for life has been served, the Minister of Justice decides whether the convicted person shall be released on probation.
Subsection 2. Release on probation presupposes that the convicted person's circumstances do not make release inadvisable, that suitable accommodation and work or other means of support has been secured for the person concerned, and that the person concerned declares his willingness to comply with the conditions for release which are laid down pursuant to subsection 3, 3rd sentence.
Subsection 3. Release is conditional upon the convicted person not committing a criminal offence during the probation period and that the person concerned complies with any conditions that may have been laid down. The probation period cannot exceed 5 years.

§ 57 applies correspondingly

§ 42

If the person released on probation commits a new criminal offence during the probationary period, and before its expiry procedural steps are taken whereby the person is charged with the offence, the court may by judgment decide that the person shall be reimprisoned to serve the life sentence. When circumstances warrant it, the court may instead impose punishment only for the new offence, possibly in conjunction with a modification of the conditions for the probationary release.
Stk. 2. If the person released on probation otherwise violates the conditions, § 40, stk. 2-5, cf.

§ 41

, stk. 3, applies correspondingly.

§ 43

In the event of full or partial remission of a sentence by conditional pardon, it may be stipulated as a condition for the pardon that the provisions of § 40, stk. 1-5, or § 42 apply correspondingly.

§§ 44-49. (Repealed)

§ 50. Fines accrue to the Treasury

Stk. 2. A fine may be imposed as an additional penalty to another type of punishment when the accused has obtained or intended to obtain financial gain for himself or others by the offence.
Stk. 3. The person fined cannot require the fine to be paid or compensated by others.

§ 51

When a fine is imposed or accepted in court pursuant to this Act, the fine is fixed in day-fines. However, this does not apply to fines imposed as an additional penalty to another legal consequence. The number of day-fines is determined having regard to the nature of the offence and the circumstances mentioned in § 80 to a minimum of 1 and a maximum of 60. The amount of each day-fine is fixed at an amount corresponding to the person's average daily income, although in fixing the amount regard should be had to the person fined's living conditions, including his assets, maintenance obligations and other circumstances affecting his ability to pay. However, the day-fine cannot be fixed at an amount lower than DKK 2.
Stk. 2. When a fine is to be fixed for an offence whereby the person has obtained or intended to obtain significant financial gain for himself or others, and the application of day-fines would result in the fine being set lower than is deemed reasonable having regard to the amount of the profit that either has been or could be obtained by the offence, the court may, however, instead of day-fines apply another fine penalty.

Stk. 3. In fixing other fines, within the limits permitted by regard to the nature of the offence and the circumstances mentioned in § 80, particular regard shall be had to the offender's ability to pay and to the profit obtained or intended or the saving made.
Stk. 4. The police may obtain from other public authorities the information necessary for fixing the fine. Furthermore, the police may require from registers kept by public authorities, including the courts, such information about the person's circumstances as is found to be of significance for fixing the fine. The information is provided in writing or by direct data transfer.

§ 52. (Repealed)

§ 53

If a fine is not paid, it is replaced by a conversion sentence of imprisonment.

§ 54

When a fine is imposed by or accepted before a court, the court decides simultaneously with fixing the fine on the duration of the conversion sentence. When the fine is fixed as day-fines, the calculation of the conversion sentence shall observe that 1 day's imprisonment corresponds to 1 day-fine, provided however that the conversion sentence cannot be set lower than 2 days. If the fine is fixed in another manner, the conversion sentence cannot be set lower than 2 days and not higher than 60 days. In special cases, however, the conversion sentence may be increased up to 9 months.
Stk. 2. If part of the fine has been paid, the conversion sentence shall be reduced proportionately, provided however that a part of a day is counted as a whole day, and that the conversion sentence cannot be reduced below the above minimum period. If part of the fine has been served, but the remainder is offered to be paid, only the whole days in which the conversion sentence has been served are taken into account in calculating this remainder.
Stk. 3. For fines imposed on legal persons, no conversion sentence is fixed.

§ 55

A fine of DKK 10,000 or less, which has been accepted following an indication from the police, is served according to the following scale:

The fine:	The conversion
sentence:
DKK 0 - 499	2 days
DKK 500 - 999	4 days
DKK 1,000 - 3,999	6 days
DKK 4,000 - 5,999	8 days
DKK 6,000 - 10,000	10 days

For other fines that have not been imposed by or accepted before a court, the conversion sentence is fixed by the district court in the judicial district where the person resides or is staying.
Stk. 2. The provisions of § 54, stk. 1, last sentence, and stk. 2, apply correspondingly.
Chapter 7
Conditional sentences

§ 56

If the court finds it unnecessary for punishment to be enforced, it is determined in the judgment that the question of fixing the sentence is postponed and lapses after a probationary period.
Stk. 2. If it must be considered more expedient, the court may fix the sentence and determine that the enforcement is postponed and lapses at the expiry of the probationary period.
Stk. 3. The postponement is conditional upon the convicted person not committing a criminal offence during the probationary period and complying with any conditions that may have been fixed pursuant to § 57. The probationary period is fixed by the court and may

generally not exceed 3 years. In special circumstances, however, a probationary period of up to 5 years may be fixed.

§ 57

The court may, as a condition for the postponement, determine that the convicted person shall be subject to supervision during the whole probationary period or part thereof. Furthermore, the court may fix other conditions considered expedient, including that the convicted person
1)	complies with special provisions concerning place of residence, work, education, use of leisure time or association with specific persons,
2)	takes up residence in a suitable home or institution; for such residence a maximum period is fixed in the judgment, which generally cannot exceed 1 year,
3)	abstains from abuse of alcohol, narcotics or similar medication,
4)	undergoes treatment for abuse of alcohol, narcotics or similar medication, if necessary in hospital or in a special institution,
5)	undergoes structured, controlled treatment for alcoholism of at least one year's duration,
6)	undergoes psychiatric treatment, if necessary in hospital,
7)	complies with the supervisory authority's decisions on restrictions on the disposal of income and assets and on the fulfilment of financial obligations,
8)	pays compensation for loss caused by the offence,
9)	undergoes measures pursuant to § 52 of the Social Services Act according to the municipality's decision, possibly of a more specifically stated nature, and complies with the instructions the municipality gives the person.

§ 58

If the application of unconditional imprisonment is deemed necessary, but the information about the accused's personal circumstances speaks in favour of applying a conditional sentence pursuant to § 56, the court may determine that part of the sentence incurred, but not more than 6 months, shall be enforced, while the judgment is otherwise made conditional.
Stk. 2. In conjunction with a conditional sentence, a fine may be imposed even if such punishment is not provided for the offence in question.

§ 59

The conditions fixed pursuant to § 57 may subsequently be modified or revoked by court order upon request from the prosecution or the convicted person. A request from the convicted person is made to the prosecution, which brings the matter before the court as soon as possible. If a request from the convicted person is not granted, he cannot make a new request until six months have elapsed from the pronouncement of the order.
Stk. 2. The questions mentioned in stk. 1 are brought before the district court which tried the case at first instance, or the district court in the judicial district where the convicted person resides or is staying. If the case was tried by a high court at first instance, the decision is made by the district court in the judicial district where the convicted person resides or is staying.

§ 60

If the convicted person violates the conditions imposed pursuant to § 57, the court may on that occasion
1)	issue a warning,
2)	by order amend the conditions and extend the probation period within the maximum period specified in § 56, subsection 3,
3)	by judgment impose punishment or other legal consequence for the committed offence or - if punishment has been imposed in the conditional sentence - make a decision on enforcement of that punishment.

§ 58

, subsection 1, applies correspondingly.
Subsection 2. With respect to the judicial decisions mentioned in subsection 1, § 59, subsection 2, applies correspondingly.

§ 61

If, before the expiry of the probation period, legal proceedings are instituted against the convicted person, whereby he is charged with a punishable offence committed before the conditional sentence, the court shall determine the legal consequence for this offence and the previously adjudicated offence.
Subsection 2. If the convicted person commits a new punishable offence during the probation period, and legal proceedings are instituted before its expiry whereby he is charged with the offence, the court shall impose an unconditional punishment or other legal consequence for this offence and the previously adjudicated offence. In this regard, the provisions of § 88, subsections 2-4, apply correspondingly. When circumstances warrant it, the court may instead

1)	impose unconditional punishment solely for the new offence, possibly in conjunction with an amendment of the conditions in the conditional sentence, or
2)	issue a new conditional sentence concerning both offences or solely for the new offence in accordance with the rules in this or the following chapter.

§ 61

a. (Repealed)
Chapter 8
Community Service

§ 62

If a conditional sentence under the rules in §§ 56 and 57 is not found sufficient, the court may, if the accused is found suitable for it, issue a conditional sentence with a condition of community service.
Subsection 2. The decision on suspension of imprisonment is made according to the rules in § 56, subsections 1 and 2.
Subsection 3. The suspension is conditional upon the convicted person not committing a punishable offence during a probation period and complying with the conditions imposed pursuant to § 63.

§ 63

As a condition for the suspension of imprisonment, it is determined that the convicted person shall perform unpaid community service for at least 30 and at most 300 hours. The imposed work obligation must be fulfilled within a maximum period, which is determined in proportion to the number of work hours.
Subsection 2. The maximum period imposed pursuant to subsection 1 may be extended by the supervisory authority if special reasons warrant it, but not beyond the probation period. The supervisory authority's decision on extension of the maximum period is brought before the court at the request of the convicted person.
Subsection 3. In the judgment, a probation period of at most 2 years is determined. It may be determined in the judgment that the probation period ceases when the maximum period for fulfillment of the work obligation has expired.
Subsection 4. The convicted person is placed under supervision during the probation period. The court may furthermore, if found appropriate, impose conditions as mentioned in § 57. The supervision ceases, and any conditions under § 57 lapse, when the maximum period for fulfillment of the work obligation has expired, unless otherwise determined in the judgment.

§ 64

In connection with a conditional sentence with a condition of community service, unconditional imprisonment or a fine may be imposed according to the rules in § 58. However, an imprisonment imposed pursuant to § 58, subsection 1, may not exceed 3 months.

§ 65

The provisions of § 59 on amendment or revocation of conditions apply correspondingly to the decisions made pursuant to § 63.

§ 66

If the convicted person violates the condition of community service or another condition, the court may
1)	make a decision on unconditional imprisonment for the committed offence or
2)	determine that the conditional sentence shall be maintained, possibly in conjunction with an extension of the maximum period for community service and of the probation period within the limit mentioned in § 63.
Subsection 2. When imposing unconditional punishment under subsection 1, no. 1, § 58, subsection 1, may be applied. A conditional partial sentence under this provision then replaces the sentence to community service, and the conditions imposed pursuant to § 63, subsection 4, may be attached thereto. Notwithstanding these provisions, an unconditional imprisonment of up to 3 months may be imposed in conjunction with continued community service.
Subsection 3. When imposing punishment, regard shall be had to the extent of the community service which the convicted person has performed. A punishment imposed pursuant to § 56, subsection 2, may be reduced.
Subsection 4. Decisions on enforcement of a suspended punishment are made by judgment, other decisions by order.

§ 59

, subsection 2, applies correspondingly.

§ 67

The rules in § 61 apply correspondingly in cases concerning persons who, after a conditional sentence with a condition of community service, are charged with a punishable offence committed before or after the judgment.
Subsection 2. If an unconditional partial sentence is imposed under § 58, subsection 1, or § 61, subsection 2, no. 1, a conditional sentence under Chapter 7

replaces the sentence to community service for the remaining punishment. Notwithstanding the provision in the 1st sentence, an unconditional custodial sentence of up to 3 months may be imposed in conjunction with continued community service.
Subsection 3.

§ 66

, subsection 3, applies correspondingly.
Chapter 9
Other Legal Consequences of the Punishable Act

§ 68

If an accused is acquitted of punishment pursuant to § 16, the court may decide on the application of other measures found appropriate to prevent further offences. If less intrusive measures such as supervision, provisions concerning place of residence or work, addiction treatment, psychiatric treatment, etc., are not found sufficient, it may be determined that the person concerned shall be placed in a hospital for the mentally ill, in an institution for persons with extensive mental disabilities or under supervision with the possibility of administrative placement or in a suitable home or institution for special care or welfare. Placement in preventive detention may take place under the conditions mentioned in § 70.

§ 68

a. If a measure under § 68 or § 72, cf.

§ 68

, entails that the convicted person shall be placed in an institution, or if the measure provides the possibility thereof, a maximum period of 5 years is determined for this measure. The maximum period also includes measures subsequently determined under § 72, cf.

§ 68

, and which entail a relaxation of the previous measure. Under special circumstances, the court may, at the request of the prosecution, determine by order a new maximum period of 2 years.
Subsection 2. In the cases referred to in subsection 1, however, no maximum period is generally determined if the convicted person is found guilty of homicide, robbery, deprivation of liberty, serious violent crime, threats of the kind mentioned in

§ 266

, arson, rape or other serious sexual crime or of an attempt at one of the mentioned crimes. If no maximum period has been determined, the prosecution brings the question of amendment or final revocation of the measure before the court 5 years after the decision, unless the question has been submitted to the court within the last two years. Thereafter, the question is submitted to the court at least every other year.
Subsection 3. For measures other than those mentioned in subsection 1, a maximum period for the measure is determined, which may not exceed 3 years. Under special circumstances, the court may, at the request of the prosecution, extend the maximum period by order. The total time for the measure may not exceed 5 years.

§ 69

If the offender was, at the time of committing the punishable act, in a state caused by deficient development, weakening or disturbance of the mental functions, and which is not of the nature mentioned in § 16, the court may, if found appropriate, instead of imposing punishment, decide on measures as mentioned in § 68, 2nd sentence.

§ 69

a. If a measure under § 69 results in the convicted person being placed in an institution, or if the measure provides the possibility thereof, a maximum period of 5 years shall be fixed for this measure and a maximum period for the stay, which generally cannot exceed 1 year. The maximum period of 5 years also includes measures subsequently fixed under § 72, cf.

§ 69

and § 68, 2nd sentence, and which result in a mitigation of the previous measure. In special circumstances, the court may, upon request from the prosecution authority, fix by order a new maximum period of 2 years for the measure or a new maximum period for the stay.
Stk. 2. In the cases referred to in subsection 1, however, generally no maximum period shall be fixed for the measure if the convicted person is found guilty of homicide, robbery, deprivation of liberty, serious violent crime, threats of the kind referred to in § 266, arson, rape or other serious sexual offence or of an attempt to commit one of the said offences.

§ 68

a, subsection 2, 2nd and 3rd sentences, shall apply correspondingly.
Stk. 3. For measures other than those referred to in subsection 1, a maximum period for the measure shall be fixed, which cannot exceed 3 years. In special circumstances, the court may, upon request from the prosecution authority, extend the maximum period by order. The total period for the measure cannot exceed 5 years.

§ 70. A person may be sentenced to preventive detention if

1)	he is found guilty of homicide, robbery, deprivation of liberty, serious violent crime, threats of the kind referred to in § 266 or arson or of an attempt to commit one of the said offences, and
2)	it must be assumed, according to the nature of the act committed and the information about his person, including in particular about previous criminality, that he presents an imminent danger to the life, body, health or liberty of others, and
3)	the application of preventive detention instead of imprisonment is found necessary to prevent this danger.
Stk. 2. A person may furthermore be sentenced to preventive detention if
1)	he is found guilty of rape or other serious sexual offence or of an attempt thereto, and
2)	it must be assumed, according to the nature of the act committed and the information about his person, including about previous criminality, that he presents a substantial danger to the life, body, health or liberty of others, and
3)	the application of preventive detention instead of imprisonment is found necessary to prevent this danger.

§ 71

If there is a question of sentencing an accused to placement in an institution or to preventive detention under the rules in §§ 68-70, the court may appoint for him an assistance guardian, as far as possible a person from among his closest relatives, who together with the appointed defence counsel shall assist the accused during the case.
Stk. 2. If the accused is sentenced to placement as referred to in subsection 1, or if the decision provides the possibility of such placement, an assistance guardian shall be appointed for him. The guardian shall keep himself informed about the condition of the convicted person and ensure that the stay and other measures are not extended longer than necessary. The appointment ceases when the measure is finally terminated.
Stk. 3. The Minister of Justice shall lay down more detailed rules on the appointment and remuneration of assistance guardians and on their tasks and more detailed powers.

§ 72

It is incumbent upon the prosecution authority to ensure that a measure under §§ 68, 69 or 70 is not maintained for a longer period and to a greater extent than necessary.
Stk. 2. A decision on alteration or final termination of a measure under §§ 68, 69 or 70 shall be made by order upon request from the convicted person, the assistance guardian, the prosecution authority, the management of the institution or the prison and probation service. A request from the convicted person, the assistance guardian, the management of the institution or the prison and probation service shall be submitted to the prosecution authority, which shall bring the matter before the court as soon as possible. If a request from the convicted person or the assistance guardian is not granted, a new request may not be submitted until half a year has elapsed from the pronouncement of the order.
Stk. 3. The provision in § 59, subsection 2, shall apply correspondingly to decisions under subsection 2. If there is a question of alteration of the measure on account of a new breach of the law, the question shall, however, be decided by the court dealing with the case concerning the breach.

§ 73

If the person who has committed a punishable act, after its commission but before judgment is pronounced, has entered into a condition of the kind referred to in § 16 or § 69 which is not merely transitory, the court shall decide whether punishment shall be imposed or lapse. If found expedient, the court may decide that measures under

§ 68

or § 69 shall be applied instead of punishment, or until the punishment may be executed.
Stk. 2. The provisions in §§ 71-72 shall apply correspondingly.
Stk. 3. If a person who is sentenced to punishment is, pursuant to subsection 1, 2nd sentence, placed in an institution, the duration of such stay shall be counted towards the term of punishment.

§ 73

a. The Minister of Justice may, after consultation with the Minister for Social Affairs and Integration and the Minister for Health and Prevention, lay down rules on the granting of permission for leave etc. to persons who are placed in a hospital for the mentally ill etc. pursuant to a decision made under §§ 68 or
69. In that connection, the Minister of Justice may provide that decisions made pursuant to these rules cannot be brought before a higher administrative authority.

§ 74. (Repealed)

§ 74

a. If a person who at the time of the act had not reached the age of 18 has committed more serious violent crime against persons or other serious crime, the court may decide that the person concerned shall undergo a structured, controlled socio-pedagogical treatment of 2 years' duration if it must be considered expedient to prevent further breaches of the law.
Stk. 2. The court may impose on the convicted person obligations corresponding to the conditions that may be fixed under § 57. The maximum period for stay in a residential institution or approved place of residence is 1 year and 6 months, of which at most 12 months in a secure unit in a residential institution for children and young persons. If a person who is subject to a measure under subsection 1 commits new crime, the court may, instead of imposing punishment, extend the measure, including the maximum periods under 2nd sentence, by up to 6 months.
Stk. 3. The convicted person may require decisions on transfer to a secure unit in a residential institution for children and young persons and decisions on transfer from outpatient treatment to placement in a residential institution for children and young persons or approved place of residence to be brought before the court for review. The same applies to the extent that the social authorities, with authority in the judgment, decide that the person concerned shall remain in the institution beyond the period fixed in the judgment for the stay. The decision shall be made by order. The bringing of the case before the court shall not have suspensive effect. The provision in § 59, subsection 2, shall apply correspondingly.
Stk. 4. The Minister of Justice may, after consultation with the Minister for Social Affairs and Integration, lay down rules on the granting of permission for leave etc. to persons who are subject to a measure under subsections 1 and
2. In that connection, the Minister of Justice may provide that decisions made pursuant to these rules cannot be brought before a higher administrative authority.

This excerpt sits under: Udskriftsdato: 14. februar 2024 > kapitel i stedet for dommen til samfundstje

§ 75

The proceeds of a criminal act or an amount corresponding thereto may be confiscated in whole or in part. If there is insufficient basis for determining the amount, an amount estimated to correspond to the proceeds obtained may be confiscated.
Stk. 2. If it must be considered necessary to prevent further offences, or if special circumstances otherwise warrant it, confiscation may be made of
1)	objects that have been used or intended to be used in a criminal act,
2)	objects that have been produced by a criminal act, and
3)	objects in respect of which a criminal act has otherwise been committed.
Stk. 3. Instead of confiscation of the objects mentioned in stk. 2, an amount corresponding to their value or part thereof may be confiscated.
Stk. 4. Instead of confiscation pursuant to stk. 2, a decision may be made on measures concerning the objects to prevent further offences.
Stk. 5. When an association is dissolved by judgment, its assets, archives, records and the like may be confiscated.

§ 76

Confiscation pursuant to § 75, stk. 1, may be made from the person to whom the proceeds have accrued directly from the criminal act.
Stk. 2. Confiscation of the objects and values mentioned in § 75, stk. 2 and 3, may be made from the person responsible for the offence and from the person on whose behalf he has acted.
Stk. 3. Specially secured rights over objects that are confiscated lapse only by order of the court under conditions corresponding to those stated in stk. 2.
Stk. 4. If one of the persons mentioned in stk. 1 and 2 has, after the criminal act, made dispositions over proceeds or objects of the nature referred to in § 75, stk. 2, or rights thereto, the transferred property or its value may be confiscated from the acquirer if the acquirer was aware of the connection of the transferred property with the criminal act or has shown gross negligence in this respect, or if the transfer was made as a gift.
Stk. 5. If a person who has confiscation liability pursuant to stk. 1-4 dies, his liability lapses. However, this does not apply to confiscation pursuant to § 75, stk. 1.

§ 76

a. Full or partial confiscation may be made of assets belonging to a person who is found guilty of a criminal act when
1)	the act is of such a nature that it may yield significant proceeds, and
2)	it may be punished under the law by imprisonment for 6 years or more or is a violation of the legislation on euphoric substances.
Stk. 2. Under conditions as mentioned in stk. 1, full or partial confiscation may be made of assets that the person's spouse or cohabitant has acquired, unless
1)	the asset was acquired more than 5 years before the criminal act that forms the basis for confiscation pursuant to stk. 1, or
2)	the marriage or cohabitation relationship did not exist at the time of acquisition.
Stk. 3. Under conditions as mentioned in stk. 1, full or partial confiscation may be made of assets transferred to a legal person over which the person alone or together with his closest relatives has a controlling influence. The same applies if the person receives a significant part of the legal person's income. However, confiscation may not be made if the asset was transferred to the legal person more than 5 years before the criminal act that forms the basis for confiscation pursuant to stk. 1.
Stk. 4. Confiscation pursuant to stk. 1-3 may not be made if the person makes it probable that an asset has been acquired lawfully or with lawfully acquired funds.
Stk. 5. Instead of confiscation of specific assets pursuant to stk. 1-3, an amount corresponding to their value or part thereof may be confiscated.

§ 77

If confiscation is made pursuant to § 75, stk. 1, or § 76 a, and someone has a claim for compensation in connection with the offence, the confiscated property may be used to cover the claim for compensation.
Stk. 2. The same applies to objects and values confiscated pursuant to § 75, stk. 2 and 3, if a decision to that effect is made by the judgment.
Stk. 3. If the convicted person has, in one of the cases mentioned in stk. 1 and 2, paid compensation to the injured party after the judgment, the confiscation amount is reduced accordingly.

§ 77

a. Objects which, due to their nature in connection with other existing circumstances, must be feared to be used in a criminal act may be confiscated insofar as it must be considered necessary to prevent the criminal act. Under the same conditions, confiscation may be made of other assets, including money.

§ 75

, stk. 4, applies correspondingly.

§ 78

Criminal conduct does not entail loss of civil rights, including the right to activity pursuant to a general trade licence or seaman's certificate.
Stk. 2. However, a person who has been convicted of criminal conduct may be excluded from exercising activity that requires special public authorisation or approval if the conduct shown justifies an imminent danger of abuse of the position or office.
Stk. 3. The question of whether the conduct shown is an obstacle to the exercise of an activity referred to in stk. 2 must be brought before the court by the prosecution authority at the request of either the person who has been refused an application for such authorisation or approval or of the competent authority.

§ 59

, stk. 2, applies correspondingly. The decision is made by order. If the decision results in exclusion from the activity in question, the question may be brought before the court again, but not earlier than after 2 years have elapsed. Authorisation or approval may also be granted by the competent authority before the expiry of this period.

§ 79

A person who exercises one of the activities referred to in § 78, stk. 2, may by judgment for criminal conduct be deprived of the right to continue to exercise the activity in question or to exercise it in certain forms if the conduct shown justifies an imminent danger of abuse of the position.

Stk. 2. The same applies, when special circumstances warrant it, to the exercise of other activity. According to the same rule, deprivation may be made of the right to participate in the management of a business enterprise in this country or abroad without being personally and unlimitedly liable for the enterprise's obligations
Stk. 3. The deprivation is for a period of 1 to 5 years, calculated from the final judgment, or until further notice, in which case the question of continued exclusion from the activity in question may, after 5 years have elapsed, be brought before the court according to the rules contained in § 78, stk. 3. When special circumstances warrant it, the Minister of Justice may permit that bringing before the court takes place before the 5-year period mentioned in the 1st sentence has elapsed.
Stk. 4. During the handling of the cases mentioned in stk. 1 and 2, the court may by order exclude the person in question from exercising the activity until the case has been finally decided. It may be determined by the judgment in the case that appeal does not have suspensive effect.
10.	kapitel
Determination of punishment

§ 80

In determining the punishment, weight must be given to the seriousness of the offence and to information about the offender, taking into account uniformity in the application of the law.
Stk. 2. In assessing the seriousness of the offence, regard must be had to the harm, danger and violation associated with the offence and to what the offender realised or should have realised in this respect. In assessing information about the offender, regard must be had to his general personal and social circumstances, his conduct before and after the act and his motives for the act.

§ 81

In determining the sentence, the following shall generally be considered as aggravating circumstances:
1) that the offender has previously been punished in a manner relevant to the case,
2) that the offence was committed by several persons acting together,
3) that the offence was specially planned or part of extensive criminality,
4) that the offender intended the offence to have considerably more serious consequences than it had,
5) that the offender has shown particular recklessness,
6) that the offence was motivated by others' ethnic origin, faith, sexual orientation or the like,
7) that the offence was motivated by the injured party's lawful statements in public debate,
8) that the offence was committed in the performance of public service or office or through abuse of position or special relationship of trust otherwise,
9) that the offender has induced another person to participate in the offence by coercion, fraud or exploitation of that person's young age or significant economic or personal difficulties, lack of insight, recklessness or an existing relationship of dependency,
10) that the offender has participated in criminality committed by a child under 15 years of age,
11) that the offender has exploited the injured party's defenceless position,
12) that the offence was committed by a person serving a sentence or other criminal sanction involving deprivation of liberty,
13) that the offence was committed by a former inmate against the institution or a person employed at the institution.

§ 81

a. The sentence prescribed in sections 119, 123 and 245, section 245, cf.

§ 247

, section 246, cf.

§ 245,

§ 246

, cf.

§ 245

, cf.

§ 247

, and section 252(1) of this Act, may be increased up to double if the offence was motivated by a mutual conflict taking place between groups of persons and where, on several occasions as part of the conflict, either firearms have been used or weapons or explosives which, due to their particularly dangerous nature, are capable of causing significant harm have been used, or arson covered by section 180 of this Act has been committed.

Stk. 2. In determining the sentence for violation of sections 180, 183(2) and 237 of this Act, it shall generally be considered as a particularly aggravating circumstance if the offence was motivated by a mutual conflict as referred to in subsection 1.

§ 82

In determining the sentence, the following shall generally be considered as mitigating circumstances:
1) that the offender had not reached 18 years of age when the offence was committed,
2) that the offender is of advanced age, when application of the usual sentence is unnecessary or harmful,
3) that the offence borders on being covered by a ground for exemption from punishment,
4) that the offender has acted in excusable ignorance of or excusable misunderstanding of legal rules prohibiting or requiring the commission of the act,
5) that the offence was committed in an agitated state of mind provoked by the injured party or persons associated with that person through an unlawful attack or a gross insult,
6) that the offence was committed as a result of coercion, fraud or exploitation of the offender's young age or significant economic or personal difficulties, lack of insight, recklessness or an existing relationship of dependency,
7) that the offence was committed under the influence of strong compassion or emotion, or there are other special circumstances concerning the offender's state of mind or the circumstances of the offence,
8) that the offender has voluntarily averted or sought to avert the danger caused by the criminal act,
9) that the offender has voluntarily reported himself or herself and made a full confession,
10) that the offender has provided information that is decisive for the clarification of criminal acts committed by others,
11) that the offender has remedied or sought to remedy the damage caused by the criminal act,
12) that the offender is deprived of one of the rights referred to in section 79 or subjected to other consequences that may be equated with punishment as a result of the criminal act,
13) that the criminal case against the offender has not been decided within a reasonable time, without this being attributable to the offender,
14) that so much time has passed since the criminal act was committed that application of the usual sentence is unnecessary.

§ 83

The sentence may be reduced below the prescribed sentencing range when information about the offence, the offender's person or other circumstances decisively argue in favour thereof. In otherwise mitigating circumstances, the sentence may be waived.

§ 84

It is a condition for the application of provisions on increased sentence or other legal consequences in cases of recidivism that the offender, before committing the offence again, has been found guilty in the Danish state of a committed criminal act to which the law attaches recidivist effect on the act now committed, or attempt at or participation in such an act.
Stk. 2. The court may attach to criminal convictions pronounced outside the Danish state the same recidivist effect as those pronounced in this country.
Stk. 3. The recidivist effect ceases when 10 years have elapsed, before the new criminal act was committed, after the previous sentence has been served, finally remitted or lapsed. If the previous sentence is a fine, the said period is calculated from the date of the final judgment or acceptance of the fine. With regard to conditional sentences, the period is calculated from the final judgment.

§ 85. (Repealed)

§ 86

If the convicted person has been arrested, remanded in custody or admitted for mental examination, a number of days corresponding to the number of commenced 24-hour periods during which the deprivation of liberty or admission lasted shall be deducted from the imposed prison sentence. Deprivations of liberty that have not lasted at least 24 hours do not result in deduction. If the convicted person has been isolated during the deprivation of liberty by order of the court, an additional number of days corresponding to one day for each commenced period of 3 24-hour periods during which the convicted person has been isolated shall be deducted. The judgment shall contain information about the duration of deprivations of liberty, admissions and isolation that result in deduction. The court may exceptionally determine that the entire sentence shall be considered served, even if the imposed sentence is longer than the time during which the convicted person has been deprived of liberty or admitted. If an appeal is dismissed or withdrawn, such a decision is made by decision of the superior court. If a fine has been imposed, it shall be determined in the judgment that the fine or part thereof shall be considered served.
Stk. 2. In a judgment under section 58(1), deduction shall be made in the unconditional part of the sentence. However, it may be determined in the judgment that deduction shall not or shall only partially be made in the unconditional part of the sentence.
Stk. 3. The provisions of subsections 1 and 2 also apply to judicial decisions under section 60(1)(3), in cases where the conditionally convicted person has been arrested or remanded in custody before the decision.
Stk. 4. If the convicted person has been arrested, remanded in custody or admitted for mental examination abroad, the court shall determine the extent to which deduction shall be made in the imposed sentence.
Stk. 5. The provisions of subsection 1, first and second sentences, apply correspondingly to persons who are committed to serve a prison sentence after having been arrested or remanded in custody due to violation of conditions for pardon or parole.

§ 87. (Repealed)

§ 88

If a person has committed several offences by one or more acts, a joint penalty shall be imposed for these within the prescribed sentencing range or, if several sentencing ranges are applicable, the most severe of these. In particularly aggravating circumstances, the penalty may exceed the highest penalty prescribed for any of the offences by up to half.
Stk. 2. If one of the offences carries imprisonment and another a fine, the court may, instead of a joint prison sentence, impose a fine in addition to imprisonment.
Stk. 3. If one of the offences carries day-fines and another a fine of a different kind, the court shall impose a joint penalty of day-fines, unless it is deemed most appropriate in the circumstances to impose a penalty for each offence separately.
Stk. 4. If one of the offences carries a measure under §§ 68-70 or § 74 a, while another is punishable by penalty, the court may decide that this penalty shall lapse.

§ 89

If a person who has already been sentenced to a penalty is found additionally guilty of a punishable act committed before the judgment, a supplementary penalty shall be imposed to the extent that concurrent adjudication would have resulted in an increase of the penalty. A supplementary penalty may be imposed for a shorter period than prescribed in § 33. If enforcement of the previously imposed penalty has not been completed, the rules in § 88 shall be followed as far as possible.

§ 89

a. In connection with a judgment whereby a person is subjected to a measure under §§ 68-70 or § 74 a, the court may decide that a previously imposed penalty which has not been enforced shall lapse.
Stk. 2. If a person who is subject to a measure under §§ 68-70 or § 74 a is sentenced to a penalty, the court may decide that the previously imposed measure shall lapse.

§§ 90-91. (Repealed)

11.	kapitel
Termination of the legal consequences of the punishable act

§ 92

An offence is not punishable when limitation has occurred pursuant to §§ 93-94.

§ 93. The limitation period is

1)	2 years when no higher penalty than imprisonment for 1 year is provided for the offence.
2)	5 years when no higher penalty than imprisonment for 4 years is provided.
3)	10 years when no higher penalty than imprisonment for 10 years is provided.
4)	15 years when no higher penalty than imprisonment for a fixed term is provided.
Stk. 2. The limitation period is in no case less than 5 years for
1)	violation of § 296, stk. 3, § 297, stk. 2, and § 302, stk. 2, of this Act,
2)	violation of tax, customs, duty or subsidy legislation whereby unlawful gain is or may be obtained.
Stk. 3. For violation of § 223, stk. 1, and § 225, cf.

§ 223

, stk. 1, of this Act, the limitation period is in no case less than 10 years.
Stk. 4. If a person has by the same act committed several offences for which different limitation periods apply under stk. 1-3, the longest of these periods shall apply with respect to all offences.

§ 93

a. When an offence is covered by an international agreement acceded to by Denmark, according to which criminal liability is not subject to limitation, limitation does not occur.

§ 93

b. When an offence is covered by § 157 a of this Act, limitation does not occur.

§ 94

The limitation period is calculated from the day on which the punishable activity or omission ceased.
Stk. 2. When punishability depends on or is affected by a consequence that has occurred or another subsequent event, the period is, however, calculated from the occurrence of the consequence or event.
Stk. 3. If the act was committed on a Danish ship outside the realm, the period is calculated from the day the ship arrived in a Danish port. The commencement of the period may not, however, be postponed under this provision by more than 1 year.
Stk. 4. For violation of §§ 210 and 216-224, § 225, cf.

§§ 216-224

, § 226, § 227, stk. 1, § 245 a, § 246, cf.

§ 245

a, and § 262 a, stk. 2, against a person under 18 years of age or of § 232 against a child under 15 years of age, the limitation period is, however, calculated at the earliest from the day the injured person turns 21 years of age. If the perpetrator has by violence, unlawful coercion under § 260 or otherwise by a punishable act forced the injured person to refrain from reporting the offence to the police, the limitation period is, however, calculated at the earliest from the time when the coercion ceased.
Stk. 5. The limitation period is interrupted when the person concerned is made aware of the charge, or when the prosecution authority requests a procedural step whereby the person concerned is charged with the offence. The limitation period for a legal person's liability may be interrupted in relation to a person who, pursuant to § 157 a of the Administration of Justice Act, may receive service of process on behalf of the legal person.
Stk. 6. If prosecution is abandoned without the decision being reversed by a superior prosecution authority within the ordinary time limit for reversal, the limitation period continues as if prosecution had not taken place. This also applies when prosecution is suspended indefinitely. If the suspension is due to the accused having evaded prosecution, the period of prosecution is, however, not included in the calculation of the limitation period.

§ 95

When an act cannot be punished due to limitation, it also cannot result in legal consequences under §§ 68-70, § 74 a, § 164, stk. 4, or § 236, confiscation or deprivation of rights. For confiscation, however, the limitation period is in no case less than 5 years and for confiscation under § 75, stk. 1, not less than 10 years.

§ 96

The right to private prosecution and to request public prosecution lapses when the entitled person has not brought an action or made a request within 6 months after having obtained such knowledge that he has sufficient grounds for bringing an action or making a request for prosecution.

Stk. 2. If there are several persons entitled to prosecute or several guilty persons, the period is calculated separately for each of them. If the time limit for requesting public prosecution has been exceeded for one of the guilty persons but not for the others, it is, however, for the prosecution authority to decide whether a request for prosecution against these shall be granted.
Stk. 3. The right to bring private prosecution or request public prosecution lapses when 6 months have elapsed after the injured person's death.
Stk. 4. If a privately prosecuted case does not lead to a decision on the criminal claim, the period continues so that the time during which prosecution has taken place is not included.
Stk. 5. The provisions in stk. 1-4 also apply with respect to the legal consequences referred to in

§ 273, however, the limitation period is 3 years

§ 97

Imposed prison sentences and other legal consequences of a liberty-depriving nature lapse by limitation according to the rules in stk. 2-6.
Stk. 2. The limitation period is
1)	5 years for imprisonment up to 1 year and for measures under § 74 a,
2)	10 years for imprisonment of more than 1 year but not exceeding 4 years, and for measures under §§ 68 and 69,
3)	15 years for imprisonment of more than 4 years but not exceeding 8 years, and for preventive detention under § 70 and
4)	20 years for fixed-term imprisonment exceeding 8 years.
Stk. 3. The limitation period is calculated from the time when the judgment could be enforced according to the general rules of the legislation.
Stk. 4. The limitation period does not include the time during which
1)	enforcement is suspended by conditional sentence or conditional pardon,
2)	the person concerned is serving another prison sentence or is subject to another criminal legal consequence of a liberty-depriving nature, or
3)	the commencement of enforcement is prevented because the person concerned evades enforcement.
Stk. 5. The limitation period is interrupted when enforcement commences.
Stk. 6. If a decision has been made on re-imprisonment after release on parole or trial discharge or after conditional pardon for part of a penalty, the limitation period for the remaining sentence or the remaining part of another legal consequence is calculated from the decision on re-imprisonment. If enforcement is interrupted in a manner other than by release on parole, trial discharge or pardon, the period is calculated from the interruption, cf. however stk. 4, no. 3.

This excerpt sits under: Udskriftsdato: 14. februar 2024 > kapitel i stedet for dommen til samfundstje

§ 97

a. If a request for enforcement has not been submitted beforehand, a fine lapses after
1)	5 years, when the fine does not exceed DKK 10,000, and
2)	10 years, when the fine exceeds DKK 10,000.
Stk. 2. Imprisonment in default of payment of a fine lapses after 3 years, unless its execution has been commenced beforehand. For fines exceeding DKK 10,000, however, the period is 5 years.
Stk. 3. The limitation periods referred to in subsection 1 are calculated from the time when the decision could be enforced according to the general rules of the legislation. The periods do not include the time during which enforcement has been suspended by conditional sentence or conditional pardon.
Stk. 4. The limitation period for confiscation claims is 10 years.

§ 97

b. Criminal sanctions cannot be enforced after the death of the convicted person.
Stk. 2. The prosecution authority may, however, bring the question of upholding a confiscation before the court that tried the case at first instance. The confiscation can only be upheld insofar as it concerns objects or amounts obtained as proceeds from the criminal act, or which correspond to such proceeds. The court may amend the confiscation order so that an amount is confiscated instead of objects. The court's decision is made by order.
Stk. 3. Decisions pursuant to section 164, subsection 4, and section 273, subsection 2, may be enforced after the death of the convicted person.

§ 97

c. Confiscation may be pardoned in the same manner as punishment.

Special Part
Chapter 12
Offences against the independence and security of the State

§ 98

Any person who commits an act aimed at bringing the Danish State or any part thereof under foreign rule or detaching any part of the State by foreign assistance, by use of force or by threat thereof, shall be liable to imprisonment for any term, including life.
Stk. 2. The provision in subsection 1 also applies to any person who, with the said purpose, initiates more extensive sabotage, production or traffic stoppage, as well as any person who participates in such measure knowing what the act is aimed at.

§ 99

Any person who commits an act aimed at causing war, occupation or other hostilities such as blockade or other coercive measures to be inflicted upon the Danish State or any state allied with it in the event of war, or who otherwise works to ensure that the freedom of decision of the Danish State is violated by foreign assistance, shall be liable to imprisonment for any term, including life.
Stk. 2. Occupation means here and elsewhere in Chapters 12 and 13 foreign occupation of Danish territory, when and as long as it is imposed on the country by use of force or threat thereof.

§ 100

Any person who, by public statements, incites to, or causes manifest danger of, hostile measures against the Danish State shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 years.
Stk. 2. Any person who, by public statements, incites to, or causes manifest danger of, foreign power interference in the affairs of the Danish State shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 1 year.

§ 101

Any person who, with war, occupation or other hostilities in view, commits any act whereby assistance to the enemy is prepared shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 16 years.

§ 102

Any person who, during war or occupation, provides assistance to the enemy by advice or deed or, in furtherance of hostile interests, weakens the combat capability of the Danish State or its allies shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 16 years.
Stk. 2. The following conduct is thus considered assistance to the enemy:
1)	Recruitment to or service in the armed forces of a hostile war or occupation power or in military or police corps or similar corps or organisations operating in connection therewith.
2)	Performance of duties as a civilian official under the police or prison service of a hostile war or occupation power, insofar as the duties include participation in interrogation or guarding of prisoners.
3)	Denunciation or similar complicity in any person being arrested or subjected to arrest or assault by a hostile authority or an organisation or person cooperating therewith.
4)	Propaganda in favour of a hostile war or occupation power, including activity as publisher, editor or business manager of a newspaper, periodical, publishing house or press bureau working to further hostile interests.
5)	Provision of substantial economic support to further propaganda of the kind referred to in item 4 or to a party or organisation that improperly cooperates with the hostile war or occupation power or works to further its interests.
Stk. 3. If denunciation, cf. subsection 2, item 3, has taken place under such circumstances that the perpetrator has realised that someone was thereby exposed to imminent danger of losing their life, suffering serious injury to body or health, being taken out of the country or being deprived of liberty for a longer period, or if a violation of

§§ 245

, 246 or 250 has been committed in order to force a statement or confession or otherwise as part of ill-treatment of prisoners, imprisonment for life may be imposed.

§ 103

Any person who, during war or occupation or under imminent prospect thereof, breaches a contract relating to measures taken by the Danish State on that account, or who otherwise counteracts such measures, shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 years.
Stk. 2. If the breach has taken place through gross negligence, the penalty is a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 4 months.

§ 104

Any person who, in an improper manner, directly or through intermediaries, cooperates in a commercial capacity with a hostile war or occupation power shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 8 years.
Stk. 2. Criminal liability pursuant to subsection 1 may be imposed on anyone who has held a managerial position in the enterprise concerned. Criminal liability may also be imposed on other persons employed in the enterprise when there is particularly offensive conduct on their part.
Stk. 3. In determining whether and to what extent the conduct must be considered improper, in addition to the importance of the activity to the hostile war or occupation power, particular consideration shall be given to whether the person concerned
1)	has himself been active in having a business relationship initiated, continued or expanded,
2)	has, in the enemy's interest, on his own initiative carried out a reorganisation of the enterprise or provided or attempted to provide greater or faster production than required,
3)	has invoked the enemy's assistance vis-à-vis Danish authorities to further his interests,
4)	has prevented or sought to prevent Danish authorities from obtaining full access to become acquainted with the circumstances of the enterprise, or
5)	has obtained or sought to obtain unreasonable profit or other advantages that have not been commercially reasonably justified.

§ 105

Any person who, during occupation, commits an act aimed at inducing the occupation power or any organisation or person cooperating therewith to violate the freedom of decision of Danish authorities, or who improperly exploits connection with the occupation power or any organisation or person cooperating therewith to obtain special advantage for himself or others, shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 8 years.

§ 106

Any person who acts against the interests of the State in the performance of a duty entrusted to him to negotiate or decide something on behalf of the State with a foreign state shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 16 years.

§ 107

Any person who, in the service of a foreign power or organisation or for the use of persons acting in such service, investigates or communicates information about matters which, for the sake of Danish state or societal interests, must be kept secret, shall, whether the communication is correct or not, be liable for espionage to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 16 years.
Stk. 2. If the matter concerns the circumstances referred to in section 109, or the act takes place during war or occupation, the penalty may be increased to imprisonment for life.

§ 108

Any person who, in circumstances not falling under § 107, otherwise does anything whereby foreign intelligence services are enabled or assisted to operate directly or indirectly within the territory of the Danish state, shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 6 years.
Stk. 2. If the matter concerns intelligence relating to military affairs, or the activity takes place during war or occupation, the punishment may be increased to imprisonment for up to 12 years.

§ 109

Any person who discloses or communicates information about the state's secret negotiations, deliberations or decisions in matters on which the security or rights of the state in relation to foreign states depend, or which concern significant socio-economic interests in relation to foreign countries, shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 12 years.
Stk. 2. If the said acts are committed negligently, the punishment is a fine or imprisonment for up to 3 years.

§ 110

Any person who falsifies, destroys or disposes of any document or other object which is of importance to the security or rights of the state in relation to foreign states shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 16 years.
Stk. 2. If the said acts are committed negligently, the punishment is a fine or imprisonment for up to 3 years.

§ 110

a. Any person who intentionally or negligently without proper authorisation
1)	describes, photographs or otherwise depicts Danish non-publicly accessible military defence installations, depots, units, weapons, materiel or similar, or who reproduces or publishes such descriptions or depictions,
2)	publishes provisions relating to the mobilisation and other war preparedness of Danish armed forces,
shall be punished with a fine or imprisonment for up to 3 years.
Stk. 2. Any person who intentionally or negligently without proper authorisation takes photographs from aircraft over Danish state territory or publishes such unlawfully taken photographs shall be punished with a fine.

§ 110

b. Any person who participates in violations of neutrality against the Danish state by a foreign power shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 8 years.

§ 110

c. Any person who violates provisions or prohibitions which may have been issued pursuant to law for the protection of the state's defence or neutrality measures shall be punished with a fine or imprisonment for up to 4 months or, in particularly aggravating circumstances, with imprisonment for up to 3 years.
Stk. 2. Any person who violates provisions or prohibitions which may have been issued pursuant to law for the implementation of the state's obligations as a member of the United Nations shall be punished with a fine or imprisonment for up to 4 months or, in particularly aggravating circumstances, with imprisonment for up to 4 years.
Stk. 3. Any person who violates provisions contained in or issued pursuant to regulations adopted under Article 60, 301 or 308 of the Treaty establishing the European Community or Article 215 or 352 of the Treaty on the Functioning of the European Union, and which aim to interrupt or restrict wholly or partially the financial or economic relations with one or more countries outside the European Union or to impose corresponding sanctions on individuals, groups of persons or legal entities, shall be punished with the same penalty as in stk. 2.
Stk. 4. If an offence as mentioned in stk. 1, 2 or 3 is committed negligently, the punishment is a fine or imprisonment for up to 2 years.

§ 110

d. If any of the offences referred to in Chapters 25, 26 and 27 is committed against a foreign head of state or the head of a foreign diplomatic mission, the prescribed punishment may be increased by up to one half, unless the matter is covered by Chapter 13.

§ 110

e. Any person who publicly insults a foreign nation, a foreign state, its flag or other recognised national emblem or the flag of the United Nations or the Council of Europe shall be punished with a fine or imprisonment for up to 2 years.

§ 110

f. The offences referred to in this chapter are in all cases subject to public prosecution, which takes place at the direction of the Minister of Justice.
13.	kapitel
Forbrydelser mod statsforfatningen og de øverste statsmyndigheder, terrorisme m.v.

§ 111

Any person who commits an act aimed at changing the constitution or putting it out of force by foreign assistance, by use of force or threat thereof, shall be punished with imprisonment for up to life.

§ 112

Any person who commits any act aimed at depriving the King or the person who, with authority under the constitution, conducts the government, of life, shall be punished with imprisonment of not less than 6 years.

§ 113

Any person who attacks the security or freedom of the Folketing or otherwise commits any act aimed at forcing the Folketing to make any decision or preventing it from freely exercising its activities by use of force or threat thereof, shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 16 years or, in particularly aggravating circumstances, for life.
Stk. 2. The same punishment applies to any person who in a corresponding manner attacks or exercises coercion against the King or the person who, with authority under the constitution, conducts the government, or against the ministers, the Court of Impeachment or the Supreme Court.

§ 114

For terrorism, any person who, with the intent to seriously intimidate a population or unlawfully compel Danish or foreign public authorities or an international organisation to perform or refrain from performing an act or to destabilise or destroy a country's or an international organisation's fundamental political, constitutional, economic or social structures, commits one or more of the following acts, when the act by its nature or the context in which it is committed can cause serious damage to a country or an international organisation, shall be punished with imprisonment for up to life:
1)	Manslaughter under § 237.
2)	Serious violence under § 245 or § 246.
3)	Deprivation of liberty under § 261.
4)	Disturbance of traffic safety under § 184, stk. 1, unlawful disturbances in the operation of public means of transport etc. under § 193, stk. 1, or serious vandalism under § 291, stk. 2, if these violations are committed in a manner that can endanger human life or cause significant economic loss.
5)	Hijacking of means of transport under § 183 a.
6)	Violations of legislation on weapons and explosives in particularly aggravating circumstances under § 192 a.
7)	Arson under § 180, explosion, dispersal of harmful gases, flooding, shipwreck, railway or other transport accident under § 183, stk. 1 and 2, health-hazardous contamination of water supply under § 186, stk. 1, health-hazardous contamination of things intended for general distribution etc. under § 187, stk. 1.
8)	Possession or use etc. of radioactive substances under § 192 b.
Stk. 2. Any person who, with the intent mentioned in stk. 1, transports weapons or explosives shall be punished in the same manner.
Stk. 3. Furthermore, any person who, with the intent mentioned in stk. 1, threatens to commit one of the acts mentioned in stk. 1 and 2 shall be punished in the same manner.

§ 114

a. If one of the acts mentioned in nos. 1-7 is committed without the matter being covered by § 114, the punishment may exceed the maximum punishment prescribed for the offence by up to one half. However, if the maximum punishment prescribed for the act in question is less than 4 years' imprisonment, the punishment may be increased to imprisonment for up to 6 years.
1)	Violation of § 180, § 181, stk. 1, § 183, stk. 1 or 2, § 183 a, § 184, stk. 1, § 192 a, § 193, stk. 1,

§§ 237

, 244, 245, 246, 250, § 252, stk. 1, § 266, § 288 or § 291, stk. 1 or 2, when the act is covered by Article 1 of the Convention of 16 December 1970 for the Suppression of Unlawful Seizure of Aircraft, Article 1 of the Convention of 23 September 1971 for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Civil Aviation or Article II of the Protocol of 24 February 1988 for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts of Violence at Airports Serving International Civil Aviation.
2)	Violation of § 180, § 181, stk. 1, § 183, stk. 1 or 2, § 184, stk. 1, §§ 237, 244, 245, 246, 250,

§ 252

, subsection 1, § 260, § 261, subsection 1 or 2, § 266 or § 291, subsection 1 or 2, when the act is covered by Article 2 of the Convention of 14 December 1973 on the Prevention and Punishment of Crimes against Internationally Protected Persons, including Diplomatic Agents.

3)	Violation of § 261, subsection 1 or 2, when the act is covered by Article 1 of the International Convention of 17 December 1979 against the Taking of Hostages.
4)	Violation of § 180, § 181, subsection 1, § 183, subsection 1 or 2, § 186, subsection 1, §§ 192 a, 192 b, 237, 244,
245, 246, 260, 266, 276, 278, 279, 279 a, 281, 288 or § 291, subsection 2, when the act is covered by Article 7 of the IAEA Convention (the International Atomic Energy Agency Convention) of 3 March 1980 on the Physical Protection of Nuclear Material.
5)	Violation of § 180, § 181, subsection 1, § 183, subsection 1 or 2, § 183 a, § 184, subsection 1, § 192 a, § 193,
subsection 1, §§ 237, 244, 245, 246, § 252, subsection 1, §§ 260, 266, 288 or § 291, subsection 1 or 2, when the act is covered by Article 3 of the Convention of 10 March 1988 for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Maritime Navigation or Article 2 of the Protocol of 10 March 1988 for the Suppression of Unlawful Acts against the Safety of Fixed Platforms Located on the Continental Shelf.
6)	Violation of § 180, § 181, subsection 1, § 183, subsection 1 or 2, § 183 a, § 184, subsection 1, § 186, subsection 1, § 192
a, § 193, subsection 1, §§ 237, 244, 245, 246, 250, § 252, subsection 1, § 266 or § 291, subsection 2, when the act is covered by Article 2 of the International Convention of 15 December 1997 for the Suppression of Terrorist Bombings.
7)	Violation of § 192 b, § 260 or § 266, when the act is covered by Article 2 of the International Convention of 13 April 2005 for the Suppression of Acts of Nuclear Terrorism.

§ 114

b. Any person who
1)	directly or indirectly provides financial support to,
2)	directly or indirectly procures or collects funds for, or
3)	directly or indirectly makes available money, other assets or financial or other similar services to
a person, a group or an association that commits or intends to commit acts covered by § 114 or § 114 a shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 years.

§ 114

c. Any person who recruits a person to commit or promote acts covered by § 114 or § 114 a or to join a group or association to promote the commission by the group or association of acts of this nature shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 years. In particularly aggravating circumstances, the penalty may be increased to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 16 years. Particularly aggravating circumstances shall be deemed to include, in particular, cases involving violations of a systematic or organised nature.
Subsection 2. Any person who recruits a person to commit or promote acts covered by § 114 b or to join a group or association to promote the commission by the group or association of acts of this nature shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 years.
Subsection 3. Any person who allows himself to be recruited to commit acts covered by § 114 or § 114 a shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 years.

§ 114

d. Any person who trains, instructs or otherwise teaches a person to commit or promote acts covered by § 114 or § 114 a with knowledge that the person intends to use the skills for this purpose shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 years. In particularly aggravating circumstances, the penalty may be increased to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 16 years. Particularly aggravating circumstances shall be deemed to include, in particular, cases involving violations of a systematic or organised nature.
Subsection 2. Any person who trains, instructs or otherwise teaches a person to commit or promote acts covered by § 114 b with knowledge that the person intends to use the acquired skills for this purpose shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 years.
Subsection 3. Any person who allows himself to be trained, instructed or otherwise taught to commit acts covered by § 114 or § 114 a shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 years.

§ 114

e. Any person who otherwise promotes the activities of a person, a group or an association that commits or intends to commit acts covered by §§ 114, 114 a, 114 b, 114 c or 114 d shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 years.

§ 114

f. Any person who, where the circumstances are not covered by §§ 114-114 e, participates in or provides substantial financial or other substantial support to a corps, group or association that intends to exert influence on public affairs or cause disruption of the social order by the use of force shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 years.

§ 114

g. Any person who, where the circumstances are not covered by §§ 114-114 f, participates in an unlawful military organisation or group shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years.

§ 114

h. Any person who, in aggravating circumstances, in violation of the legislation on non-proliferation of weapons of mass destruction, etc.,
1)	exports dual-use products without authorisation,
2)	provides false or misleading information or withholds information of significance for the determination of the case for the purposes of the authorities' decisions on dual-use products, or
3)	acts in violation of conditions laid down in the authorities' decisions on dual-use products
shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 years.

§ 115

If any of the offences referred to in Chapters 25, 26 and 27 is committed against the King or the person who governs in accordance with the Constitution, without the circumstances falling within §§ 112 and 113, the penalties prescribed in the said provisions may be increased up to double.
Subsection 2. If any of the said offences is committed against the Queen, the Queen Dowager or the Heir to the Throne, the penalty may be increased by up to one half.

§ 116

Any person who prevents the holding of elections to the Folketing, the Faroese Lagting or to municipal or other public councils or authorities or attempts to do so, or who distorts the outcome of an election or makes the counting impossible, shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 years.
Subsection 2. The same penalty shall apply when such acts are committed in connection with lawful direct votes on public affairs.

§ 117

Any person who, in connection with the elections or votes referred to in § 116,
1)	unlawfully obtains for himself or others access to participate in the vote,
2)	seeks to induce anyone to vote in a particular way or to refrain from voting by unlawful coercion (§ 260), by deprivation of liberty or by abuse of a position of authority,
3)	causes anyone by fraud to refrain from voting contrary to his intention, or causes his vote to be invalid or to have a different effect than intended,
4)	grants, promises or offers a pecuniary advantage in order to influence anyone to vote in a certain way or to refrain from voting,
5)	receives, demands or allows himself to be promised a pecuniary advantage in order to vote in a certain way or to refrain from voting
shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years.

§ 118

Any person who, by the use of force or threat thereof or by exploiting fear of foreign power intervention, prevents or seeks to prevent public authorities from the free exercise of their activities shall, when the act is committed with the purpose of exerting influence on public affairs or causing disruption of the social order, be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 years.
Subsection 2. The same penalty shall apply to any person who, with the intention referred to in subsection 1 and by the use of the means mentioned therein, seriously violates freedom of expression or prevents associations or other organisations from freely exercising their lawful activities.

Subsection 3. The same penalty shall also apply to any person who, with the intention referred to in subsection 1 and by the use of the means mentioned therein, commits the offence referred to in § 193 or a similar act causing public danger.

§ 118

a. The offences referred to in §§ 111-115 and 118 are in all cases subject to public prosecution, which takes place upon the order of the Minister of Justice.
Chapter 14
Offences against public authority etc.

§ 119

Any person who by violence or threat of violence assaults anyone who is required to act pursuant to public service or office, during the performance of the service or office or in connection therewith, or who in the same manner seeks to prevent such a person from performing a lawful official act or to compel him to perform an official act, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 8 years.
Stk. 2. In the same manner shall be punished any person who, without the circumstances falling under subsection 1, makes threats of violence, of deprivation of liberty or of accusation of a criminal or dishonourable offence against anyone who has been vested by the public with judicial authority or authority to make decisions concerning legal matters or concerning the enforcement of the state's penal authority, in connection with the performance of the service or office, or who in the same manner seeks to prevent such a person from performing a lawful official act or to compel him to perform an official act.
Stk. 3. If anyone otherwise places obstacles in the way of the performance of the service or office of the said persons, he shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 1 year and 6 months. In determining the penalty, it shall be considered an aggravating circumstance that the offence was committed while or immediately following a serious disturbance of peace and order in a public place in the area.

§ 120

The penalties prescribed in § 119 shall, when the acts mentioned therein are carried out by means of a riot, apply to those who instigate or lead the riot, and to the participants who fail to comply with the authority's lawfully proclaimed order to the crowd to disperse.

§ 121

Any person who by mockery, abusive language or other insulting address assaults any of the persons mentioned in § 119 during the performance of his service or office or in connection therewith shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 6 months.

§ 122

Any person who without authorisation gives, promises or offers to anyone acting in Danish, foreign or international public service or office a gift or other advantage in order to induce the person concerned to do or omit something in the service shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 6 years.

§ 123

Any person who by threat of violence molests, or who by violence, unlawful coercion under § 260, threats under § 266 or in any other manner commits a criminal act against a person, his next of kin or others connected to him in connection with the person's expected or already given statement to the police or in court, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 8 years.

§ 124

Any person who escapes while arrested or imprisoned shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 2 years.
Stk. 2. In the same manner shall be punished any person who liberates an arrested, imprisoned or compulsorily placed person, as well as any person who incites or assists such a person to escape or keeps the escaped person hidden.
Stk. 3. Any person who unlawfully makes contact with any imprisoned or compulsorily placed person shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 3 months.
Stk. 4. Any person who in a remand centre or closed prison while arrested or imprisoned unlawfully possesses a mobile telephone or similar communication equipment shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 6 months. In the same manner shall be punished visitors and other persons coming from outside who unlawfully bring a mobile telephone or similar communication equipment into a remand centre or closed prison.
Stk. 5. The provisions of subsections 1-3 also apply in relation to
1)	persons in preventive detention,

2)	persons who instead of remand in custody are deprived of liberty in an institution etc.,
3)	persons who pursuant to § 74 a are deprived of liberty in an institution etc.,
4)	persons who in connection with the execution of punishment outside remand centres and prisons, cf. subsection 1, are deprived of liberty at their residence under intensive supervision and control or in an institution etc., and
5)	persons who are serving a prison sentence while stationed outside a prison or remand centre.
Stk. 6. The provision of subsection 4, 1st sentence, also applies in relation to persons in preventive detention.

§ 125. Any person who shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 2 years

1)	in order to shield anyone from prosecution for an offence or punishment keeps him hidden, assists him in escaping or passes him off as another person,
2)	destroys, falsifies or removes objects of significance for a public investigation or obliterates the traces of an offence.
Stk. 2. Any person who performs the said acts in order to shield himself or any of his next of kin from prosecution or punishment shall not be punished.

§ 125

a. Any person who for the sake of gain and under otherwise particularly aggravating circumstances is guilty of human smuggling under section 59, subsection 7, nos. 1-5 of the Aliens Act shall be punished by imprisonment for up to 8 years. Particularly aggravating circumstances shall be considered to include in particular cases where the lives of others are endangered, or where the violations are of a more systematic or organised nature.

§ 126

Any person who removes or destroys any seal or mark placed by public arrangement shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 6 months.
Stk. 2. Any person who removes or damages any notice posted by public arrangement shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 3 months.

§ 127

Any person who evades military service or causes or contributes to a person liable for military service not fulfilling his military obligation, or who incites persons liable for military service or persons belonging to the armed forces to disobedience to official orders, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 2 years.
Stk. 2. If it occurs during war or threatening prospect thereof, the penalty shall be imprisonment for up to 6 years.

§ 128

Any person who in the Danish state carries out recruitment for foreign military service shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 2 years.

§ 129

Any person who without authorisation gives public notice of what has occurred in the electoral acts and voting referred to in § 116 or of deliberations of a confidential nature within public councils and authorities shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 3 months. In the same manner shall be punished any person who without authorisation gives public notice of deliberations within commissions and committees appointed by the government, if it has been determined and publicly announced either by the government or by the commission or committee itself that the deliberations are secret.

§ 129

a. Any person who publishes knowingly false reproductions or false quotations of communications about factual matters made in court proceedings or given in meetings of the Folketing, municipal or public councils or authorities shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 2 years.
Stk. 2. In the same manner shall be punished any person who by knowingly falsely publicly attributing to the government or any other public authority an act which it has not performed damages the country's interests in relation to foreign countries.

§ 130

Any person who exercises a public authority not vested in him shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 2 years.

§ 131

Any person who publicly or with unlawful intent represents himself as having a public authority or public authorisation for an activity, or who

without public authorisation exercises an activity for which such authorisation is required, or continues to exercise an activity to which the right has been forfeited by him, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 6 months.

§ 132

A fine shall be imposed on anyone who intentionally or negligently unlawfully uses
1)	insignia or uniform reserved for Danish or foreign public authority or military personnel,
2)	insignia or designation reserved for persons, facilities and equipment intended to provide assistance to the wounded or sick in war, or
3)	insignia or name of intergovernmental organisations.
Stk. 2. The provision in subsection 1 applies correspondingly to imitations of the said insignia, uniforms and designations.

§ 132

a. Anyone who participates in the continuation of an association's activities after it has been provisionally prohibited by the government or dissolved by judgment shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 2 years.
15.	kapitel
Offences against public order and peace

§ 133

Anyone who causes a riot with the intent to commit or threaten violence against person or property shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 3 years.
Stk. 2. The same punishment applies to those who, during a riot in which the said purpose has been manifested, act as leaders of the riot, as well as any participant who fails to comply with the authority's lawfully proclaimed order to the crowd to disperse.
Stk. 3. If any offence falling within its purpose is committed during such a riot, the instigators or leaders of the riot shall be punished according to the provision applicable to the offence in question.

§ 134

Participants in a riot who, knowing that an order to disperse has been proclaimed in the prescribed manner, do not comply with it shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 3 months.

§ 134

a. Participants in fighting or other serious disturbance of peace and order in a public place shall be punished, if they have acted by agreement or several in concert, by imprisonment for up to 1 year and 6 months.

§ 134

b. Anyone who, in connection with meetings, assemblies, processions or the like in a public place, moves about with the face wholly or partially covered with a hood, mask, paint or the like in a manner likely to prevent identification shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 6 months.
Stk. 2. The same punishment applies to anyone who in a public place possesses objects that must be considered intended for covering the face in the circumstances mentioned in subsection 1.
Stk. 3. The prohibitions mentioned in subsections 1 and 2 do not apply to covering of the face done to protect against the weather or which serves another commendable purpose.

§ 135

A fine or imprisonment for up to 3 months shall be imposed on anyone who, by unfounded calling for help, misuse of danger signal or the like, causes deployment of police, ambulance, emergency services or sea or air rescue services.

§ 136

Anyone who, without thereby having incurred a higher penalty, publicly incites to an offence shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 4 years.
Stk. 2. Anyone who publicly expressly approves of an offence covered by chapters 12 or 13 of this Act shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 2 years.

§ 137

Anyone who seeks to prevent the holding of a lawful public meeting shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 2 years.
Stk. 2. The same punishment applies to anyone who by noise or disorder disturbs a public assembly of the Folketing, the Faroese Lagting, municipal or other public councils, divine service or other public ecclesiastical act, or who in an unseemly manner disturbs a funeral.

§ 138

Anyone who intentionally or by gross negligence brings himself into an intoxicated state shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 1 year if in this state he exposes the person or significant property values of others to danger.

§ 139

Anyone who violates the peace of the grave or is guilty of unseemly treatment of a corpse shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 6 months.
Stk. 2. The same punishment applies to anyone who is guilty of unseemly treatment of things belonging to a church and used for ecclesiastical purposes.

§ 140

Anyone who publicly mocks or insults the doctrines or worship of any religious community lawfully existing in this country shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 4 months.

§ 141

Anyone who knows that any of the offences against the state or the supreme state authorities covered by sections 98, 99, 102, 106, 109, 110, 111, 112 and 113 or an offence that entails danger to human life or welfare or to significant societal values is intended to be committed, and who does not do what is in his power to prevent the offence or its consequences, if necessary by reporting to the authorities, shall be punished, if the offence is committed or attempted, by a fine or imprisonment for up to 3 years.
Stk. 2. Anyone who fails to take such preventive actions shall not, however, be punished if their taking would entail danger to life, health or welfare for himself or his next of kin.

§ 142

A fine or imprisonment for up to 3 months shall be imposed on anyone who fails upon request to provide assistance to someone to whom public authority belongs, whereby an accident or offence that exposes the life, health or welfare of others to danger is to be averted, although such assistance could be provided without danger or sacrifice of greater significance.

§ 143. (Ophævet)

16.	kapitel
Offences in public service or office etc.

§ 144

Anyone who in the exercise of Danish, foreign or international public service or office unlawfully receives, demands or allows himself to be promised a gift or other advantage shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 6 years.

§ 145

If anyone acting in public service or office demands or receives, for private gain, payment for an official act, tax or duty that is not owed, he shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 6 years. If he retains such payment received in good faith for private gain after becoming aware of the error, he shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 2 years.

§ 146

If anyone who has judicial authority, or to whom public authority belongs to make decisions in legal relations concerning private persons, commits injustice in deciding or handling the case, he shall be punished by imprisonment for up to 6 years.
Stk. 2. If the act is committed with intent to cause loss of welfare to anyone, the punishment is imprisonment for up to 16 years.

§ 147

When anyone whose duty it is to work for the enforcement of the state's penal authority thereby uses unlawful means to obtain a confession or statement or carries out an unlawful arrest, detention, search or seizure, he shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 3 years.

§ 148

When anyone to whom judicial authority or other public authority to make decisions in legal relations belongs, or whose duty it is to work for the enforcement of the state's penal authority, intentionally or by gross negligence fails to observe the statutory procedure with regard to the handling of the case or individual legal acts or with regard to arrest, detention, search, seizure or similar measures, he shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 4 months.

§ 149

When anyone whose duty it is to guard a prisoner or execute judgments in criminal cases allows an accused to escape, prevents the execution of the judgment or causes it to be executed in a milder manner than prescribed, he shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 3 years.

§ 150

When anyone acting in public service or office abuses his position to force anyone to do, tolerate or omit something, he shall be punished by imprisonment for up to 3 years.

§ 151

Anyone who incites or contributes to someone who is subordinate to the person in question in public service or office committing an offence in this service shall be punished, regardless of whether the subordinate can be punished or is exempt from punishment due to error or other reasons, according to the provision applicable to the offence in question.

§ 152

Any person who acts or has acted in public service or office and who unlawfully discloses or exploits confidential information to which that person has gained access in that connection shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 6 months.
Stk. 2. If the offence referred to in stk. 1 is committed with intent to obtain an unlawful gain for oneself or others, or if there are otherwise particularly aggravating circumstances, the penalty may be increased to imprisonment for any term not exceeding 2 years. Particularly aggravating circumstances shall be deemed to include, in particular, cases where the disclosure or exploitation has taken place under such circumstances that it causes significant harm to others or involves a particular risk thereof.
Stk. 3. Information is confidential when it is designated as such by law or other valid provision, or when it is otherwise necessary to keep it secret in order to safeguard essential considerations for public or private interests.

§ 152

a. The provision in § 152 applies correspondingly to any person who is or has been otherwise engaged in tasks performed pursuant to an agreement with a public authority. The same applies to any person who acts or has acted at a telephone installation recognised by the public authorities.

§ 152

b. Any person who exercises or has exercised a business or profession pursuant to public appointment or recognition and who unlawfully discloses or exploits information which is confidential out of consideration for private interests and to which that person has gained access in that connection shall be liable to the same penalty as under § 152.
Stk. 2. Any person who acts or has acted as an employee at the Statistical Office of the European Communities, or who works or has worked in the Office's premises, and who unlawfully discloses or exploits confidential statistical information to which that person has gained access in that connection shall also be liable to the same penalty as under § 152.

§ 152

c. The provisions in §§ 152-152 b also apply to the assistants of the persons concerned.

§ 152

d. The provisions in §§ 152-152 c apply correspondingly to any person who, without having participated in the act, unlawfully obtains or exploits information which has come about through such an offence.
Stk. 2. Any person who, without having participated in the act, unlawfully discloses information about individuals' purely private affairs, cf. section 28, stk. 1, of the Public Administration Act, which has come about through an offence under §§ 152-152 c shall be liable to the same penalty.
Stk. 3. Any person who, without having participated in the act, unlawfully discloses information which is confidential out of consideration for the security of the state or the defence of the realm shall be punished in the same manner.

§ 152

e. The provisions in §§ 152-152 d do not cover cases where the person concerned:
1)	is obliged to disclose the information or
2)	acts in justified safeguarding of an obvious public interest or of his or her own or others' interests.

§ 152

f. Offences under §§ 152-152 d by which only private interests have been violated are subject to private prosecution.
Stk. 2. However, public prosecution may take place when the aggrieved party requests it.

§§ 153-154. (Repealed)

§ 155

Any person who acts in public service or office and abuses his or her position to violate the rights of private persons or the public shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 4 months. If it is done in order to obtain an unlawful advantage for oneself or others, imprisonment for any term not exceeding 2 years may be applied.

§ 156

When any person who acts in public service or office refuses or fails to fulfil a duty entailed by the service or office, or to comply with a lawful official order, he or she shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 4 months. Offices the performance of which rests on public elections fall outside the foregoing provision.

§ 157

When any person who acts in public service or office is guilty of gross or repeated negligence or carelessness in the performance of the service or office or in the observance of the duties entailed by the service or office, that person shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 4 months. Offices the performance of which rests on public elections fall outside the foregoing provision.

§ 157

a. When determining the penalty for an offence under this Act, it shall be considered an aggravating circumstance that the offence was committed by torture.
Stk. 2. The offence is deemed to have been committed by torture if it was committed in the exercise of Danish, foreign or international public service or office by inflicting harm to body or health or severe physical or mental pain or suffering on another person
1)	in order to obtain information or a confession from someone,
2)	in order to punish, intimidate or coerce someone into doing, tolerating or refraining from something or
3)	on account of that person's political conviction, gender, race, colour, national or ethnic origin, faith or sexual orientation.

§ 157

b. The provisions in §§ 145-157 apply correspondingly in the exercise of foreign or international public service or office if the act is covered by § 157 a.
17.	kapitel
Falsk forklaring og falsk anklage

§ 158

Any person who gives false testimony before a court, including by use of telecommunications, shall be liable to imprisonment for any term not exceeding 4 years. The provision also applies to false testimony before a foreign court.
Stk. 2. Any person who gives false testimony before the Court of Justice of the European Communities shall be liable to the same penalty.
Stk. 3. If the false statement concerns only something which is of no significance for the matter being investigated, the penalty may be reduced to a fine.

§ 159

Any person who gives false testimony as an accused in a public criminal case or during examination in cases where testimony may not be required by law shall not be punished.
Stk. 2. If false testimony is given during examination before a court in cases where the person examined was entitled to refuse to testify, the penalty may be reduced and, in otherwise mitigating circumstances, be waived.

§ 160

Any person who is guilty of gross negligence in giving incorrect testimony in a case which would otherwise be punishable under § 158 or § 159, stk. 2, shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 4 months.

§ 161

Any person who, outside the case referred to in § 158, gives a false statement on oath or in a similarly solemn manner to or before a public authority, where such form is prescribed or permitted, shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 2 years.

§ 162

Any person who otherwise gives an incorrect statement to or before a public authority concerning matters about which he or she is obliged to give testimony shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 4 months.

§ 163

Any person who otherwise, for use in legal relations concerning the public authorities, gives an incorrect statement in writing or by other readable medium or certifies something of which that person has no knowledge shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 4 months.

§ 164

Any person who gives incorrect information to a public authority with intent that an innocent person thereby becomes accused, convicted or subjected to a criminal sanction for a punishable offence shall be liable to imprisonment for any term not exceeding 6 years.
Stk. 2. Any person who destroys, falsifies or removes evidence or produces false evidence with intent that someone thereby becomes accused or convicted of a punishable offence shall be punished in the same manner.
Stk. 3. Any person who commits an act as referred to in stk. 1 and 2 with intent that he or she himself or herself or another person with that person's consent thereby becomes accused, convicted or subjected to a criminal sanction for a punishable offence which he or she has not committed shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 1 year.
Stk. 4. At the request of the aggrieved party, it may be determined in the judgment that the conclusion of the judgment and as much of the grounds for the judgment as the court deems necessary shall be announced by public arrangement in one or more public newspapers.

§ 164

a. Anyone who fails to disclose circumstances that clearly indicate that a person accused or convicted of a crime is innocent, although this could be done without exposing the person concerned or their next of kin to danger to life, health or welfare or to prosecution for the crime in question, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 1 year.

§ 165

Anyone who reports to a public authority a criminal act that has not been committed, as well as anyone who submits false complaints to such an authority, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 6 months.
18.	kapitel
Offences relating to means of payment

§ 166

Anyone who counterfeits or falsifies money in order to put it into circulation as genuine, or who for the same purpose procures for himself or others counterfeited or falsified money, shall be punished by imprisonment for up to 12 years.

§ 167

Uttering counterfeited or falsified money is punished in the same way as counterfeiting and falsification. If the utterer received the money in good faith, the punishment may be reduced to a fine.

§ 168

Anyone who utters money which he suspects is counterfeited or falsified shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 3 years. If the utterer received the money in good faith, the punishment may be waived.

§ 169

Anyone who manufactures, imports or distributes objects which, by their form and appearance, present substantial external similarity to money or to a security intended for general circulation, shall be punished by a fine.

§ 169

a. Anyone who unlawfully produces, procures or distributes false electronic money with intent that it be used as genuine shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 1 year and 6 months.
Stk. 2. False electronic money means funds which, without being genuine electronic money, are suitable for use as such.
Stk. 3. The punishment may increase to imprisonment for 6 years if the act is of a particularly serious nature, in particular because of the manner in which it was carried out or because of the size of the amount.

§ 170

Anyone who, without authority in law, manufactures, imports or issues bearer instruments which appear to be intended for use in narrower or wider circles as a means of payment between persons, or which may be expected to be used in this way, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 3 months. Foreign banknotes fall outside the above provision.
19.	kapitel
Offences relating to means of evidence

§ 171

Anyone who makes use of a false document to deceive in legal relations shall be punished for forgery of documents.
Stk. 2. A document means a written or electronic statement provided with the designation of the issuer, which appears to be intended to serve as evidence.
Stk. 3. A document is false when it does not originate from the stated issuer, or when it has been given content which does not originate from that issuer.

§ 172. The punishment for forgery of documents is a fine or imprisonment for up to 2 years

Stk. 2. If the forgery of documents is of a particularly serious nature, or if a larger number of offences have been committed, the punishment may increase to imprisonment for 6 years.

§ 173

Anyone who uses a document bearing a genuine signature to deceive in legal relations, when the signature has been obtained by means of a deception on another document or on a document with content other than that intended by the signatory, shall be punished as specified in § 172.

§ 174

Anyone who in legal relations makes use of a genuine document as relating to a person other than the one to whom it actually relates, or in another manner contrary to the document's purpose, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 6 months.

§ 175

Anyone who, in order to deceive in legal relations, makes a false statement in a public document or book, in a private document or book which the person concerned is required by law or special duty to prepare or keep, or in a medical, dental, midwifery or veterinary certificate, concerning a matter in respect of which the statement is to serve as evidence, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 3 years.
Stk. 2. Anyone who in legal relations makes use of such a document or such a book as containing the truth shall be punished in the same way.
Stk. 3. The provisions of stk. 1 and 2 apply correspondingly when the document or book is prepared or kept on another readable medium.

§ 176

Anyone who, in order to deceive in trade, makes use of objects which are unlawfully provided with a public stamp or mark intended to provide assurance of the object's authenticity, type, quality or quantity, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 3 years.
Stk. 2. Anyone who in the same way makes use of objects which are unlawfully provided with a private stamp, mark or other designation which serves to indicate a circumstance relating to the object which is of importance for trade, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 1 year.
Stk. 3. Anyone who in the same way makes use of objects on which a lawfully affixed stamp, mark or designation has been altered or removed shall be punished as specified above.

§ 177

Anyone who makes use of counterfeited or falsified stamp paper, stamp marks, other marks serving to settle public taxes and duties, and postage stamps, shall be punished by imprisonment for up to 8 years. Anyone who makes use of previously used paper or marks from which the sign of previous use has been removed shall be punished with a proportionately lesser punishment.
Stk. 2. The rule in § 169 applies correspondingly with respect to stamp marks, postage stamps and similar means of franking.

§ 178

Anyone who, in order to deprive someone of their right, destroys, disposes of or renders wholly or partially unusable a means of evidence which is suitable for use as such in a legal relation, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 2 years.

§ 179

Anyone who, in order to deceive with respect to the boundaries of real property, land rights or rights relating to watercourses or bodies of water, places a false boundary stone or other mark for these, or moves, removes, alters or destroys such a mark, shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 3 years.
20.	kapitel
Offences dangerous to the public

§ 180

If anyone sets fire to his own or another's property in such circumstances that he realizes that the lives of others are thereby exposed to imminent danger, or if it is done with intent to cause extensive destruction of another's property or to promote insurrection, plunder or other such disturbance of public order, he shall be punished by imprisonment for up to life.

§ 181

Anyone who otherwise causes a fire on another's property shall be punished by imprisonment for up to 6 years.
Stk. 2. Anyone who causes a fire on his own property or on another's property with the owner's consent, with intent to defraud fire insurance or to violate the rights of mortgagees or with similar unlawful intent, shall be punished in the same way.
Stk. 3. The punishment may increase to imprisonment for 10 years if there are particularly aggravating circumstances.

§ 182

Anyone who by negligence causes a fire on another's property or to the detriment of another's financial interest shall be punished by a fine or imprisonment for up to 2 years.

§ 183

Anyone who, with intent to harm the person or property of others, causes an explosion, dispersal of harmful gases, flooding, shipwreck, railway or other transport accident, shall be punished by imprisonment for up to 12 years.
Stk. 2. If one of the acts mentioned in stk. 1 is carried out in the circumstances specified in § 180, the punishment is imprisonment for up to life.
Stk. 3. If the offence is committed negligently, the punishment is a fine or imprisonment for up to 2 years.

§ 183

a. Anyone who by unlawful coercion, cf.

§ 260

, takes control of an aircraft, a ship or another collective means of transport or means of goods transport, or interferes with its manoeuvring, shall be punished by imprisonment for up to life.
Stk. 2. Anyone who by unlawful coercion, cf.

§ 260, takes control of an offshore installation

§ 184

Any person who, without being criminally liable under § 183 or § 183 a, disturbs the safety of the operation of railways, vessels, motor vehicles or similar means of transport or the safety of traffic on public roads shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years or, in particularly aggravating circumstances, to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 years.
Stk. 2. If the offence is committed negligently, the penalty shall be a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 4 months.

§ 185

Any person who, although it was possible for him without particular danger or sacrifice to himself or others, fails by timely notification or in any other manner appropriate in the circumstances to avert to the best of his ability a fire, explosion, spread of harmful gases, flooding, maritime casualty, railway accident or similar accident which entails danger to human life shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years.

§ 186

Any person who causes danger to human life or health by causing a general shortage of drinking water or by adding substances hazardous to health to water reservoirs, water pipes or watercourses shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 years.

Stk. 2. If the offence is committed negligently, the penalty shall be a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 1 year.

§ 187. The penalty shall be imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 years for

1)	any person who adds poison or other substances to things intended for sale or widespread use, which cause the use of the thing for its intended purpose to expose human health to danger,
2)	any person who, when such things are so spoiled that the consumption or use of them is hazardous to health in the manner mentioned, subjects them to a treatment which is capable of concealing their spoiled condition,
3)	any person who, concealing the treatment carried out, offers for sale or otherwise seeks to distribute things which have been treated as mentioned under 1) or 2).
Stk. 2. If the offence is committed negligently, the penalty shall be a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 1 year.

§ 188

Any person who, without being criminally liable under § 187, no. 3, concealing the hazardous nature of the thing to health, offers for sale or otherwise seeks to distribute
1)	foodstuffs or stimulants which, due to spoilage, defective preparation, method of storage or similar reasons, are hazardous to health,
2)	articles for use which, by ordinary use, expose human health to danger, shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 years.
Stk. 2. If the offence is committed negligently, the penalty shall be a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 4 months.

§ 189

Any person who offers for sale or otherwise seeks to distribute as medicines or preventive remedies against diseases things which he knows are unsuitable for the stated purpose and that their use for this purpose exposes human life or health to danger shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 years.
Stk. 2. If the offence is committed negligently, the penalty shall be a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 4 months.

§ 190

If, under conditions corresponding to those specified in §§ 186-189, only the life or health of domestic animals is exposed to danger, the penalty shall be a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 years.

§ 191

Any person who, in violation of the legislation on euphoric substances, transfers euphoric substances to a larger number of persons or for considerable remuneration or under other particularly aggravating circumstances shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 10 years. If the transfer concerns a significant quantity of a particularly dangerous or harmful substance, or if the transfer of such a substance has otherwise been of a particularly dangerous nature, the penalty may be increased to imprisonment for a term of 16 years.
Stk. 2. The same penalty shall apply to any person who, in violation of the legislation on euphoric substances, imports, exports, purchases, delivers, receives, manufactures, processes or possesses such substances with intent to transfer them as mentioned in stk. 1.

§ 191

a. (Repealed)

§ 192

Any person who, by violating the regulations laid down by law or pursuant to law for the prevention or combating of infectious disease, causes danger that such disease may gain entry or spread among humans shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 years.
Stk. 2. If the disease is one which, according to the legislation, must be subjected to or, at the time when the act is committed, is subjected to public treatment, or against the introduction of which into the realm special precautions have been taken, the penalty shall be imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 years.
Stk. 3. Any person who, in the manner specified, causes danger that infectious disease may gain entry or spread among domestic animals or useful or cultivated plants shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years.
Stk. 4. If the offence is committed negligently, the penalty shall be a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months.

§ 192

a. Any person who violates the legislation on weapons and explosives or Article 4(1) of Regulation (EU) No 258/2012 of the European Parliament and of the Council of
14 March 20121) by, under particularly aggravating circumstances, importing, exporting, transporting, acquiring, transferring, possessing, carrying, using, manufacturing, developing or, with a view to development, conducting research into
1)	firearms or

2)	other weapons or explosives, where the weapon or explosives, due to their extremely dangerous nature, are capable of causing significant damage, shall be liable to imprisonment for a term of 1 year to 6 years.
Stk. 2. Any person who otherwise violates the legislation on weapons and explosives under particularly aggravating circumstances shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 years.

§ 192

b. Any person who, with intent to cause harm to the person of others or significant damage to the property of others or to the environment, receives, possesses, transfers or alters radioactive substances or manufactures or possesses an explosive nuclear device or a device designed to spread radioactive substances or capable of emitting ionising radiation shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 years.
Stk. 2. Any person who, with intent to cause harm to the person of others or significant damage to the property of others or to the environment or to compel anyone to do or refrain from doing an act,
1)	uses radioactive substances or devices emitting ionising radiation,
2)	removes, alters or damages a necessary protection against the spread of radioactive substances or against ionising radiation, or
3)	uses or damages a nuclear installation with the result that a release of radioactive substances occurs or danger thereof is caused, shall be liable to imprisonment for a term not exceeding 12 years.
Stk. 3. If one of the acts mentioned in stk. 2 is committed under the circumstances specified in § 180 or with the result that extensive damage to the environment occurs or imminent danger thereof is caused, the penalty shall be imprisonment for any term, including life.
Stk. 4. If the offence is committed negligently, the penalty shall be a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 2 years.
21.	kapitel
Various acts harmful to the public

§ 193

Any person who unlawfully causes extensive disruption in the operation of public means of transport, public postal services, telegraph or telephone installations, radio or television installations, information systems or installations serving the general supply of water, gas, electricity or heat shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 years.
Stk. 2. If the offence is committed with gross negligence, the penalty shall be a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 6 months.

§ 194

Any person who removes, destroys or damages public monuments or objects intended for public use or adornment, belonging to public collections or specially protected shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 years.

§ 195

Any person who offers for sale foodstuffs which he knows to be imitated or adulterated, without their special nature being indicated in an unambiguous manner on the goods themselves or on their label or packaging and on the invoice, if such is issued, shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for a term not exceeding 3 months.

This excerpt sits under: Udskriftsdato: 14. februar 2024 > kapitel i stedet for dommen til samfundstje

§ 196

Imprisonment for up to 6 years shall be imposed on any person who, under aggravating circumstances, in violation of environmental legislation
1) pollutes air, water, soil or subsoil with the result that significant damage to the environment occurs or imminent danger thereof is caused, or
2) stores or disposes of waste or similar substances with the result that significant damage to the environment occurs or imminent danger thereof is caused.
Stk. 2. In the same manner shall be punished any person who, in violation of environmental legislation, pollutes air, water, soil or subsoil or stores or disposes of waste or similar substances, when the violations are of a more systematic or organised nature.

22. kapitel
Begging and harmful business activity

§ 197

Any person who, contrary to a police warning, commits begging, or who permits any person under 18 years of age belonging to his household to beg, shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 6 months. Under mitigating circumstances the penalty may be waived. A warning under this provision is valid for 5 years.

§§ 198-202. (Ophævet)

§ 203

Any person who seeks livelihood by games of chance or betting of a similar nature which is not permitted by special provision, or by promoting such games, shall be punished with a fine or imprisonment for up to 1 year.
Stk. 2. The court shall decide whether the proceeds won shall be confiscated or repaid.

§ 204

Any person who, in a public place, provides accommodation for or arranges unauthorised games of chance shall be punished with a fine or imprisonment for up to 6 months.
Stk. 2. Association premises shall be considered equivalent to a public place when either anyone or anyone of a certain social class can as a rule obtain admission to the association, or unauthorised games of chance form part of the association's purpose, or special payment is made for participation in the game.
Stk. 3. Any person who, in a public place, participates in unauthorised games of chance shall be punished with a fine.

§§ 205-207. (Ophævet)

23. kapitel
Offences in family relations

§ 208

Any person who enters into marriage or has his partnership registered, and who is already married or is a party to a registered partnership, shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 3 years or, if the other person has been unaware of the existing marriage or registered partnership, with imprisonment for up to 6 years.
Stk. 2. If the act is committed by gross negligence, the penalty is imprisonment for up to 1 year.
Stk. 3. Any person who, without himself being married or being a party to a registered partnership, enters into marriage or registered partnership with a person who is already married or is a party to a registered partnership, shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 1 year.
Stk. 4. It shall be considered a mitigating circumstance for a person who is already married or a party to a registered partnership if the most recent marriage or registered partnership cannot be annulled. Under the same condition, the penalty for the person who is neither married nor a party to a registered partnership may be waived entirely.

§ 209. (Ophævet)

§ 210

Any person who has sexual intercourse with a relative in descending line shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 6 years. Adoption relationships are equivalent to biological kinship.
Stk. 2. Any person who has sexual intercourse with his brother or sister shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 2 years. The penalty may be waived for a person who has not reached 18 years of age.
Stk. 3. The provisions in stk. 1 and 2 apply correspondingly with respect to sexual relations other than intercourse.

§§ 211-212. (Ophævet)

§ 213

Any person who, by neglect or degrading treatment, violates his spouse, his child or any person under 18 years of age subject to his authority or care or a relative or relative by marriage in ascending line, or who, by wilfully evading a duty of maintenance or contribution incumbent upon him towards any of the said persons, exposes them to distress, shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 2 years.

§ 214. (Ophævet)

§ 215

Any person who removes a person under 18 years of age from the authority or care of parents or other proper person or contributes to his evading such authority or care shall be punished according to the rules in § 261.
Stk. 2. In the same manner shall be punished any person who unlawfully takes the child out of the country.
24. kapitel
Sexual offences

§ 216. For rape shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 8 years any person who

1) forces sexual intercourse by violence or threat of violence or
2) obtains sexual intercourse by other unlawful coercion, cf.

§ 260

, or with a person who is in a state or situation in which the person concerned is unable to resist the act.
Stk. 2. For rape shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 12 years any person who has sexual intercourse with a child under 12 years of age.
Stk. 3. The penalty under stk. 1 may increase to imprisonment for 12 years if the rape has been of a particularly dangerous nature or there are otherwise particularly aggravating circumstances.
Stk. 4. It shall generally be included as an aggravating circumstance in determining the penalty that the injured party is a victim of human trafficking.

§ 217. (Ophævet)

§ 218

Any person who, by exploiting a person's mental illness or mental retardation, obtains sexual intercourse with that person shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 4 years.

§ 219. With imprisonment for up to 4 years shall be punished any person who is

1) employed by the prison and probation service and who has sexual intercourse with a person who is admitted to one of the institutions of the prison and probation service and who is subject to the authority of the person concerned,
2) employed by the police and who has sexual intercourse with a person who is deprived of liberty and in police custody, or
3) employed by or supervising a residential institution or residence for children and young people, psychiatric ward, residential institution for persons with severe mental disabilities or similar institution, and who has sexual intercourse with anyone who is admitted to the institution.

§ 220

Any person who, by gross abuse of a person's employment, economic or treatment or care dependency, obtains sexual intercourse with that person shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 1 year or, if the act is committed against a person under 18 years of age, with imprisonment for up to 4 years.

§ 221

With imprisonment for up to 4 years shall be punished any person who obtains sexual intercourse by stealth with a person who mistakes the perpetrator for another person.

§ 222

Any person who has sexual intercourse with a child under 15 years of age shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 8 years, unless the act is covered by § 216, stk. 2. In determining the penalty, it shall be included as an aggravating circumstance that the perpetrator has obtained the sexual intercourse by exploiting his physical or mental superiority.
Stk. 2. If the perpetrator has obtained the sexual intercourse by coercion or making threats, the penalty may increase to imprisonment for up to 12 years.

§ 223

Any person who has sexual intercourse with a person under 18 years of age who is the guilty person's stepchild or foster child or is entrusted to the person concerned for instruction or upbringing shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 4 years.
Stk. 2. With the same penalty shall be punished any person who, by gross abuse of a superiority based on age and experience, seduces a person under 18 years of age to sexual intercourse.

§ 224

Any person who contributes to a person under 18 years of age having sexual intercourse with a customer for payment or promise of payment shall be punished with a fine or imprisonment for up to 6 years.

Stk. 2. Any person who, as a customer, has sexual intercourse with a person under 18 years of age for payment or promise of payment shall be punished with a fine or imprisonment for up to 2 years.

§ 225

The provisions in §§ 216-224 apply correspondingly with respect to sexual relations other than intercourse.

§ 226

Any person who takes pornographic photographs, films or similar of a person under 18 years of age with intent to sell or otherwise distribute the material shall be punished with a fine or imprisonment for up to 6 years.

§ 227

Any person who contributes to a person under 18 years of age participating in a performance with pornographic appearance shall be punished with a fine or imprisonment for up to 6 years.
Stk. 2. Any person who, as a spectator, witnesses a performance as mentioned in stk. 1 with the participation of a person under 18 years of age shall be punished with a fine or imprisonment for up to 2 years.

§ 228

Violation of § 216, subsection 1, no. 2, §§ 218 or 222-224, § 225, cf.

§ 216

, subsection 1, no. 2, §§ 218 or 222-224, § 226 or § 227, subsection 1, which as a result of the perpetrator's ignorance of the injured party's condition or age cannot be attributed to the perpetrator as intentional, shall be punished with a proportionately lesser penalty if the perpetrator has nevertheless acted negligently.

§§ 229-231 (Repealed)

§ 232

Any person who by indecent conduct offends decency shall be punished with a fine or imprisonment for up to 2 years or, if the conduct has been committed against a child under 15 years of age, with a fine or imprisonment for up to 4 years

§ 233

Any person who operates a business whereby another person has sexual relations with a client in return for payment or promise of payment shall be punished for procuring with imprisonment for up to 4 years.
Subsection 2. Any person who otherwise exploits that another person professionally has sexual relations with a client in return for payment or promise of payment shall be punished with a fine or imprisonment for up to 3 years. The same applies to any person who facilitates that another person has sexual relations with a client in return for payment or promise of payment by acting as an intermediary for the sake of gain or in repeated cases.
Subsection 3. Any person who rents out a hotel room for use by another person who professionally has sexual relations with a client in return for payment or promise of payment shall be punished with a fine or imprisonment for up to 1 year.

§ 233

a. Any person who by unlawful inducement, reinforcement or exploitation of an error or by other improper means causes another person to have sexual relations with a client in return for payment or promise of payment shall be punished with a fine or imprisonment for up to 2 years.

§ 234

Any person who sells indecent pictures or objects to a person under 16 years of age shall be punished with a fine.

§ 235

Any person who disseminates pornographic photographs or films, other pornographic visual reproductions or the like of persons under 18 years of age shall be punished with a fine or imprisonment for up to 2 years or under particularly aggravating circumstances with imprisonment for up to 6 years. Particularly aggravating circumstances include in particular cases where the child's life is endangered, where serious violence is used, where serious harm is caused to the child, or where the dissemination is of a more systematic or organised nature.
Subsection 2. Any person who possesses or in return for payment or through the internet or a similar system for dissemination of information acquires knowledge of pornographic photographs or films, other pornographic visual reproductions or the like of persons under 18 years of age shall be punished with a fine or imprisonment for up to 1 year.
Subsection 3. The provision in subsection 2 does not cover possession of photographs, films etc. of a person who has reached 15 years of age if that person consents to the possession.

§ 235

a. (Repealed)

§ 236

When a person is convicted under §§ 216 or 222, § 223, subsection 2, § 224, subsection 1, § 225, cf.

§§ 216 or 222,

§ 223

, subsection 2, or § 224, subsection 1, § 228, cf. one of the preceding provisions, § 232 or § 262 a, subsection 2, the judgment may impose on that person a prohibition against

1)	staying or moving in a more narrowly defined area near the scene of the offence (restraining order),
2)	without the permission of the police allowing children under 18 years of age to take up residence in his or her home or himself or herself taking up residence with persons with whom children under 18 years of age are staying (residence prohibition),
3)	receiving visits from children under 18 years of age who are not accompanied by an adult (visit prohibition), or
4)	through the internet or a similar system for dissemination of information attempting to contact children under 18 years of age who do not know the convicted person (contact prohibition).
Subsection 2. Prohibition under subsection 1 does not cover contact, residence or movement which for special reasons must be considered justified. Prohibition under subsection 1, nos. 2 and 3, does not cover the convicted person's children or adopted children.
Subsection 3. Prohibition may be imposed when, according to the nature of the offence committed and the information about the convicted person, including previous criminality, it must be assumed that there is an imminent danger that the convicted person will commit a new offence of a similar nature, and that the prohibition will be suitable to prevent this danger.
Subsection 4. Prohibition is imposed for a period from 1 to 5 years calculated from final judgment or until further notice.
Subsection 5. Prohibition must not be disproportionate to the disruption thereby caused to the person's circumstances, the consideration for those whom the prohibition is intended to protect, and the nature of the offence committed.
Subsection 6. When prohibition has been imposed until further notice, the convicted person may after 5 years calculated from final judgment demand that the prosecution brings the question of maintaining the prohibition before the court. When special circumstances warrant it, the Minister of Justice may permit that bringing before the court takes place earlier.

§ 59

, subsection 2, applies correspondingly. The decision is made by court order. If the decision is that the prohibition is wholly or partly maintained, the question may be brought before the court again, but not earlier than after 2 years.
Subsection 7. Violation of a prohibition under subsection 1 is punished with imprisonment for up to 4 months.
25.	Chapter
Offences against life and body

§ 237

Any person who kills another person shall be punished for manslaughter with imprisonment from 5 years up to life.

§ 238

If a mother kills her child during or immediately after birth, and it must be assumed that she has acted in distress, out of fear of disgrace or under the influence of a weakening, confusion or bewilderment brought about by the birth, she shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 4 years.
Subsection 2. If the offence has not been completed and the act has not caused harm to the child, punishment may be waived.

§ 239

Any person who kills another person at that person's express request shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 3 years.

§ 240

Any person who assists in another person depriving himself or herself of life shall be punished with a fine or imprisonment for up to 3 years.

§ 241

Any person who negligently causes the death of another person shall be punished with a fine or imprisonment for up to 4 months or under particularly aggravating circumstances with imprisonment for up to 8 years. If the conduct has been committed in connection with drink-driving, violation of section 54, subsection 1 or 2, of the Road Traffic Act, or particularly reckless driving, this is considered a particularly aggravating circumstance.

§§ 242-243. (Repealed)

§ 244

Any person who commits violence against or otherwise assaults another person's body shall be punished with a fine or imprisonment for up to 3 years.

§ 245

Any person who commits an assault of a particularly raw, brutal or dangerous nature or is guilty of ill-treatment shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 6 years. If such an assault has resulted in significant harm to body or health, this shall be regarded as a particularly aggravating circumstance.

Subsection 2. Any person who outside the cases mentioned in subsection 1 inflicts harm to body or health on another person shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 6 years.

§ 245

a. Any person who by an assault with or without consent cuts away or otherwise removes female external genitalia wholly or partly shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 6 years.

§ 246

If an assault covered by § 245 or § 245 a has been of such a serious nature or has resulted in such serious injuries or death that there are particularly aggravating circumstances, the punishment may be increased to imprisonment for 10 years.

§ 247

If any of the offences mentioned in §§ 244-246 is committed by a person who has previously been convicted of intentional assault or of an offence that has been connected with intentional violence, the punishment may be increased by up to half.
Subsection 2. The same applies when an offence as mentioned in §§ 244-246 is committed against a person who by the nature of his or her work is particularly exposed to violence.

§ 248

For assault during a fight, or when the assaulted person has retaliated against the assailant, the punishment may under particularly mitigating circumstances be waived.

§ 249

Any person who negligently causes significant injury to another person's body or health shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 4 months or, under particularly aggravating circumstances, to imprisonment for any term not exceeding 8 years. If the offence is committed in connection with drink driving, violation of section 54(1) or (2) of the Road Traffic Act, or particularly reckless driving, this shall be considered a particularly aggravating circumstance.

§ 250

Any person who places another person in a helpless condition or abandons a person in his or her care in such a condition shall be liable to imprisonment for any term not exceeding 8 years.

§ 251

A woman who, during childbirth, in an irresponsible manner exposes the child to serious danger shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 1 year.

§ 252

Any person who, for the sake of gain, out of gross wantonness or in a similarly reckless manner, causes imminent danger to another person's life or limb shall be liable to imprisonment for any term not exceeding 8 years.
Stk. 2. The same penalty shall apply to any person who in a reckless manner causes a risk that another person may be infected with a life-threatening and incurable disease.
Stk. 3. The Minister of Justice shall, after consultation with the Minister for Health and Prevention, determine which diseases are covered by subsection 2.

§ 253

Any person who, although it was possible for him without particular danger or sacrifice to himself or others, fails
1)	to the best of his ability to assist a person who is in obvious mortal danger, or
2)	to take such measures as are required by the circumstances to rescue a person who is apparently lifeless, or as are prescribed for the care of persons affected by shipwreck or other similar accident,
shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 2 years.
Stk. 2. Any person who violates subsection 1 in connection with fleeing from a traffic accident in which a person has suffered significant personal injury shall be liable to imprisonment for any term not exceeding 2 years.

§ 254

Any person who intentionally or negligently leaves a dangerous weapon or explosives in the possession of a child under 15 years of age, an insane person, a mentally retarded person or an intoxicated person shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 3 months.

§§ 255-259. (Repealed)

26.	kapitel
Offences against personal liberty

§ 260. Any person who commits unlawful coercion shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 2 years if he

1)	by violence or by threat of violence, of significant damage to property, of deprivation of liberty or of making a false accusation of a criminal or dishonourable act or of disclosing matters belonging to private life, compels another person to do, tolerate or omit something,
2)	by threat of reporting or disclosing a criminal act or of making true dishonourable accusations, compels another person to do, tolerate or omit something, unless the coercion can be considered reasonably justified by the circumstances to which the threat relates.
Stk. 2. If a person is compelled to enter into marriage or to undergo a religious ceremony without civil validity, the penalty may be increased to imprisonment for any term not exceeding 4 years.
Stk. 3. If a person is compelled to wear an item of clothing that conceals the person's face, the penalty may be increased to imprisonment for any term not exceeding 4 years.

§ 261

Any person who deprives another person of his or her liberty shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 4 years.
Stk. 2. If it is done for the sake of gain, or if the deprivation of liberty has been prolonged or has consisted in a person being unlawfully detained as insane or mentally retarded or being brought into foreign military service or into captivity or other dependency in a foreign country, the penalty shall be imprisonment for any term not exceeding 12 years.
Stk. 3. Any person who by gross negligence causes a deprivation of liberty of the kind referred to in subsection 2 shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 6 months.

§ 262. (Repealed)

§ 262

a. Any person who recruits, transports, transfers, harbours or subsequently receives a person where there is used or has been used
1)	unlawful coercion under section 260,
2)	deprivation of liberty under section 261,
3)	threats under section 266,
4)	unlawful inducement, reinforcement or exploitation of an error, or
5)	other improper means
with a view to exploiting that person through prostitution, production of pornographic photographs or films, performance involving pornographic acts, forced labour, slavery or slavery-like conditions, criminal acts or removal of organs, shall be liable to imprisonment for any term not exceeding 10 years for human trafficking.
Stk. 2. The same penalty shall apply to any person who, with a view to exploiting that person through prostitution, production of pornographic photographs or films, performance involving pornographic acts, forced labour, slavery or slavery-like conditions, criminal acts or removal of organs,
1)	recruits, transports, transfers, harbours or subsequently receives a person under 18 years of age, or
2)	provides payment or other benefit to obtain consent to the exploitation from a person who has authority over the victim, and any person who receives such payment or other benefit.
27.	kapitel
Violations of privacy and honour

§ 263. Any person who unlawfully

1)	breaks open or withholds from another person a letter, telegram or other sealed communication or record or acquaints himself with its contents,
2)	gains access to another person's repositories,
3)	by means of a device secretly listens to or records statements made in private, telephone conversations or other conversations between others or proceedings at a closed meeting in which he does not himself participate, or to which he has unlawfully gained access,
shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 6 months.
Stk. 2. Any person who unlawfully gains access to another person's information or programs intended for use in an information system shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 1 year and 6 months.
Stk. 3. If the offences referred to in subsection 1 or 2 are committed with intent to obtain or acquaint oneself with information about a business's trade secrets or under other particularly aggravating circum-

stances, the penalty may be increased to imprisonment for any term not exceeding 6 years. The same penalty shall apply to the offences referred to in subsection 2 where they are of a more systematic or organised nature.

§ 263

a. Any person who unlawfully sells commercially or disseminates to a wider circle a code or other means of access to a non-publicly accessible information system to which access is protected by a code or other special access restriction shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 1 year and 6 months.
Stk. 2. The same penalty shall apply to any person who unlawfully passes on a large number of codes or other means of access as referred to in subsection 1.
Stk. 3. The same penalty shall apply to any person who unlawfully obtains or passes on a code or other means of access as referred to in subsection 1 to
1)	a socially critical information system, cf.

§ 193, or

2)	an information system that processes sensitive information covered by section 7(1) or section 8(1) of the Act on the Processing of Personal Data concerning the personal circumstances of several persons.
Stk. 4. If the passing on etc. referred to in subsections 1-3 takes place under particularly aggravating circumstances, the penalty shall be imprisonment for any term not exceeding 6 years. Particularly aggravating circumstances shall be deemed to include, in particular, cases where the passing on etc. takes place on a particularly large scale or involves a particular risk of significant damage.

§ 264. Any person who unlawfully

1)	gains access to another person's house or other place not freely accessible,
2)	fails to leave another person's property after being requested to do so,
shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 6 months.
Stk. 2. If the offence referred to in subsection 1(1) is committed with intent to obtain or acquaint oneself with information about a business's trade secrets, or if there are otherwise particularly aggravating circumstances, the penalty may be increased to imprisonment for any term not exceeding 6 years. Particularly aggravating circumstances shall be deemed to include, in particular, cases where the offence is committed under such circumstances that it causes significant damage to others or involves a particular risk thereof.

This excerpt sits under: Udskriftsdato: 14. februar 2024 > kapitel i stedet for dommen til samfundstje

§ 264

a. Anyone who without authorization photographs persons who are located in a place not freely accessible shall be punished by fine or imprisonment for up to 6 months. The same applies to anyone who without authorization observes such persons by means of binoculars or other apparatus.

§ 264

b. (Repealed)

§ 264

c. The penal provisions contained in §§ 263, 264 and 264 a apply correspondingly to anyone who, without having participated in the act, obtains or without authorization exploits information that has been obtained through the violation.

§ 264

d. Anyone who without authorization discloses communications or images concerning another person's private affairs or otherwise images of that person in circumstances that obviously can be demanded to be withheld from the public shall be punished by fine or imprisonment for up to 6 months. The provision also applies where the communication or image concerns a deceased person.

§ 265. (Repealed)

§ 266

Anyone who, in a manner likely to cause serious fear in anyone for their own or others' life, health or welfare, threatens to commit a punishable act shall be punished by fine or imprisonment for up to 2 years.

§ 266

a. Anyone who, without the circumstances being covered by §§ 136 and 266, publicly makes statements that seek to incite acts of violence or vandalism shall be punished by fine or imprisonment for up to 1 year.

§ 266

b. Anyone who publicly or with intent to disseminate to a wider circle makes a statement or other communication by which a group of persons is threatened, insulted or degraded on account of their race, colour, national or ethnic origin, faith or sexual orientation shall be punished by fine or imprisonment for up to 2 years.

Stk. 2. In determining the penalty, it shall be considered a particularly aggravating circumstance that the conduct has the character of propaganda activity.

§ 266

c. Anyone who, after a case has been decided, with respect to it again makes the rejected accusations against the same person so frequently that their making degenerates into persecution shall, when the information is likely to harm that person in the public's esteem, be punished by fine or imprisonment for up to 4 months.

§ 267

Anyone who violates another person's honour by insulting words or acts or by making or disseminating accusations of conduct likely to lower the injured person in the esteem of fellow citizens shall be punished by fine or imprisonment for up to 4 months.

§ 267

a. (Repealed)

§ 268

If an accusation has been made or disseminated against better knowledge, or if the perpetrator has lacked reasonable grounds to consider it true, the perpetrator shall be punished for defamation, and the penalty mentioned in § 267 may then be increased to imprisonment for 2 years.

§ 269

An accusation is exempt from punishment when its truth is proved, as well as when the person who in good faith makes the accusation has been obliged to express themselves or has acted in legitimate protection of obvious public interest or of their own or others' interests.
Stk. 2. Punishment may be waived when circumstances are disclosed that gave reason to consider the accusation true.

§ 270

If the making of the accusation is improperly insulting in its form, punishment under § 267 may be applied even if proof of truth is adduced; the same applies if the perpetrator has not had reasonable occasion to make the insult.
Stk. 2. If the injured person solely claims punishment under this section, proof of the truth of the accusation shall not be permitted unless general considerations decisively speak in favour thereof.

§ 271

Proof shall not be permitted for a punishable act for which the person accused has been acquitted by final judgment at home or abroad.
Stk. 2. Proof of truth for a punishable act for which judgment has been rendered does not exempt from punishment when the injured person, having regard to the nature of the act, the time when it was committed, and their circumstances otherwise, had reasonable claim that the matter in question should not now be brought up.

§ 272

Punishment under § 267 may be waived when the act was provoked by improper conduct by the injured person, or the latter has retaliated against the offender.

§ 273

If a defamatory accusation is unjustified, a remark to that effect shall be included in the judgment at the injured person's request.
Stk. 2. Anyone who is convicted of a defamatory accusation may, at the injured person's request, be obliged to pay them a sum fixed by the court to cover the costs of publication in one or more public newspapers either of the judgment alone or also of the grounds for the judgment. This applies even if the judgment only provides for annulment under the provision in stk. 1.

§ 274

Anyone who makes or disseminates defamatory statements about a deceased person shall be punished by fine or, if defamation is present, by imprisonment for up to 4 months.
Stk. 2. Defamatory statements made about someone 20 years after their death may only be prosecuted when the condition mentioned in § 268 is present.

§ 275

The offences in this chapter are subject to private prosecution. However, this does not apply to those mentioned in §§ 266, 266 a and 266 b.
Stk. 2. In the cases mentioned in §§ 263-264 d, public prosecution may take place when the injured person requests it. The same applies when someone who is acting or at the time in question was acting in public service or office is accused of conduct that may result or could have resulted in forfeiture of the position or

office, and when an accusation is made in an anonymous or falsely or fictitiously named writing.

§ 275

a. (Repealed)
28.	Chapter
Property offences

§ 276

Anyone who without the possessor's consent removes another's movable thing in order to obtain for themselves or others unlawful gain by its appropriation shall be punished for theft. A movable thing here and in the following includes a quantity of energy that is produced, stored or put to use for the production of light, heat, power or motion or for other economic purposes.

§ 277

Anyone who, in order thereby to obtain for themselves or others unlawful gain, appropriates another's movable thing that is not in anyone's custody, or that has come into the perpetrator's custody through the owner's forgetfulness or in a similar accidental manner, shall be punished for unlawful dealing with found property.

§ 278

Anyone who, in order thereby to obtain for themselves or others unlawful gain,
1)	appropriates another's movable thing that is in their custody, without the circumstances falling under § 277,
2)	denies receipt of a loan of money or other loan for ownership or of a service for which payment is to be made,
3)	unlawfully consumes money entrusted to them, even if they were not obliged to keep it separate from their own property, shall be punished for embezzlement.
Stk. 2. The provision in stk. 1, no. 1, does not cover dispositions over purchased objects with respect to which a seller has reserved ownership until the purchase price is paid.

§ 279

Anyone who, in order thereby to obtain for themselves or others unlawful gain, by unlawfully creating, confirming or exploiting an error induces another to an act or omission whereby a financial loss is caused to that person or someone for whom the act or omission is decisive shall be punished for fraud.

§ 279

a. Anyone who, in order thereby to obtain for themselves or others unlawful gain, unlawfully alters, adds or deletes information or programs for electronic data processing or otherwise unlawfully seeks to influence the result of such data processing shall be punished for computer fraud.

§ 280

Anyone who, insofar as the circumstances do not fall under §§ 276-279 a, in order thereby to obtain for themselves or others unlawful gain causes another a financial loss
1)	by misuse of an access created for them to act with legal effect for that person or
2)	by acting against that person's interests in a financial matter that it is incumbent upon them to manage for the other person, shall be punished for breach of mandate.

This excerpt sits under: Udskriftsdato: 14. februar 2024 > kapitel i stedet for dommen til samfundstje

§ 281

For extortion, insofar as the conduct does not fall under § 288, the following shall be punished:
1) anyone who, in order thereby to procure for himself or others unlawful gain, threatens anyone with violence, significant damage to property or deprivation of liberty, with making a false accusation of a criminal or dishonourable act or disclosing matters belonging to private life,
2) anyone who threatens anyone with reporting or disclosing a criminal act or with making true dishonourable accusations in order thereby to procure for himself or others a gain that is not properly justified by the circumstances that gave rise to the making of the threat.

§ 282

For usury, anyone who exploits another person's significant financial or personal difficulties, lack of understanding, recklessness or an existing relationship of dependency in order to obtain or stipulate in a contractual relationship a performance that is substantially disproportionate to the counter-performance, or for which no consideration is to be paid, shall be punished.

§ 283

For debtor fraud, anyone who, in order thereby to procure for himself or others unlawful gain, shall be punished:
1) disposes of, pledges or otherwise deals with property belonging to him over which a third party has acquired a right with which the act is incompatible,
2) after his estate has been taken under bankruptcy proceedings or reconstruction proceedings have been initiated, performs acts aimed at preventing the estate's assets and claims from benefiting the creditors,
3) by false pretences, bribery, sham legal transactions, significant gifts, disproportionate consumption, sale at below cost, payment of or provision of security for unmatured debts or in any other similar manner withdraws his assets or claims from serving his creditors or any one of them for satisfaction.
Stk. 2. If acts of the kind specified in no. 3 have been performed to favour a creditor, the latter shall, however, only be punished if, at a time when he foresaw that the debtor's bankruptcy or reconstruction proceedings were immediately imminent, he induced the debtor to grant him such favour.

§ 284. (Repealed)

§ 285

The offences mentioned in §§ 276 and 278-283 shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 1 year and 6 months. In the cases mentioned in § 283, subsection 2, the penalty for both the debtor and the favoured creditor may be reduced to a fine.
Stk. 2. Unlawful dealing with lost property shall be punished with a fine or imprisonment for up to 1 year and 6 months.

§ 286

The penalty may be increased to imprisonment for up to 6 years when the offences mentioned in §§ 276, 281 and 282 are of a particularly serious nature, in particular due to the manner of execution, or because the offence was committed by several persons acting together or involving a weapon or other dangerous instrument or means, or due to the considerable value of the stolen objects or the circumstances in which they were situated, or because the theft was committed as part of organised burglary crime, or when a large number of offences have been committed.
Stk. 2. The penalty may be increased to imprisonment for up to 8 years when the offences mentioned in §§ 278-280 and 283 are of a particularly serious nature, in particular due to the manner of execution, or because the offence was committed by several persons acting together, or as a result of the extent of the gain obtained or intended, or when a large number of offences have been committed.

§ 287

If any of the offences mentioned in §§ 276-283 is of lesser culpability due to the circumstances under which the act was committed, the minor significance of the objects appropriated or the financial loss suffered, or for other reasons, the penalty is a fine. In otherwise mitigating circumstances, the penalty may be waived.
Stk. 2. Attempt to commit an offence covered by subsection 1 is punishable.

§ 288

For robbery, anyone who, in order thereby to procure for himself or others unlawful gain by violence or threat of immediate use of violence, shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 6 years:
1) deprives or extorts from anyone a movable thing belonging to another,
2) secures a stolen thing or
3) forces anyone to an act or omission that results in financial loss for the victim or anyone for whom the victim acts.
Stk. 2. The penalty may be increased to imprisonment for 10 years when a robbery is of a particularly serious nature, in particular due to its particularly dangerous character, the manner of execution or the extent of the gain obtained or intended, or because the perpetrator entered a private home to commit robbery, or when a large number of offences have been committed.

§ 289

Anyone who, in order thereby to procure for himself or others unlawful gain, commits a violation of a particularly serious nature of tax, customs, duty or subsidy legislation or of § 289 a shall be punished with imprisonment for up to 8 years.

Stk. 2. The provision in subsection 1 shall only apply if the legislation mentioned in subsection 1 refers to this provision.
Stk. 3. When assessing an additional fine under § 50, subsection 2, in connection with a violation of subsection 1, weight shall be given to whether the offence is of a particularly serious nature, in particular due to the manner of execution, or because the offence was committed by several persons acting together, or when a large number of offences have been committed.

§ 289

a. Anyone who, for use in decisions concerning payment or repayment of customs duties or charges to or payment or repayment of subsidies or support from Danish authorities or the institutions of the European Communities or other Community bodies, provides incorrect or misleading information or withholds information, including fails to fulfil an obligation to provide information of significance for the decision of the case, with intent to evade payment for himself or others or with intent to obtain unlawful payment for himself or others, shall be punished with a fine or imprisonment for up to 1 year and 6 months.
Stk. 2. Anyone who unlawfully exploits a lawfully obtained benefit with respect to payments as mentioned in subsection 1, and anyone who unlawfully uses payments as mentioned in subsection 1 for purposes other than those for which they were originally granted, shall be punished in the same manner. However, this does not apply to benefits granted for private use.
Stk. 3. The provisions in subsections 1 and 2 shall only apply where other legislation does not contain a corresponding regulation.
Stk. 4. Violations of subsection 1 or subsection 2 of a particularly serious nature shall be punished under § 289.

§ 290

For receiving, anyone who unlawfully receives or procures for himself or others a share in proceeds obtained by a punishable violation of the law, and anyone who unlawfully by concealing, storing, transporting, assisting in disposal or in a similar manner subsequently acts to secure for another the proceeds of a punishable violation of the law, shall be punished with a fine or imprisonment for up to 1 year and 6 months.
Stk. 2. The penalty may be increased to imprisonment for 6 years when the receiving is of a particularly serious nature, in particular due to the professional or commercial character of the offence or as a result of the gain obtained or intended, or when a large number of offences have been committed.
Stk. 3. Punishment under this provision may not be imposed on anyone who receives proceeds for customary maintenance from family members or cohabitant, or anyone who receives proceeds as normal consideration for ordinary consumer goods, articles of use or services.

§ 291

Any person who destroys, damages or disposes of things belonging to another shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 1 year and 6 months.
Subsection 2. If vandalism is committed on a considerable scale or of a more systematic or organised nature, or if the offender has previously been found guilty under this section or under § 180, § 181, § 183, subsections 1 and 2, § 184, subsection 1, § 193 or § 194, the penalty may be increased to imprisonment for a term of 6 years.
Subsection 3. If the damage is caused under the circumstances mentioned in subsection 2 by gross negligence, the penalty shall be a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 6 months.
Subsection 4. When determining the penalty under subsections 1 and 2, it shall be considered an aggravating circumstance that the offence was committed while or immediately following a serious disturbance of peace and order in a public place in the area.

§ 292

Any person who, by destroying, damaging or disposing of his property, withdraws it from serving his creditors or any one of them for satisfaction, shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 1 year.

§ 293

Any person who unlawfully uses a thing belonging to another shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 1 year, unless the offence is covered by § 293 a. Under aggravating circumstances, in particular when the thing is not returned after use, the penalty may be increased to imprisonment for a term of 2 years.
Subsection 2. Any person who unlawfully prevents another from disposing of things in whole or in part shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 1 year. The penalty may be increased to imprisonment for a term of 2 years where the offences are of a more systematic or organised nature, or where there are otherwise particularly aggravating circumstances.

§ 293

a. For theft of use of a motor vehicle, any person who unlawfully uses a motor vehicle belonging to another shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 1 year and 6 months. Under particularly aggravating circumstances, including in particular in cases of repetition, the penalty may be increased to imprisonment for a term of 4 years.

§ 294. Any person who unlawfully takes the law into his own hands shall be liable to a fine

§ 295

Any person who, in fresh waters or on the territorial sea, in violation of the rights of private persons or the public, carries out embankment or places fixed installations, shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 3 months.

§ 296. Any person who shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 1 year and 6 months

1)	disseminates false or misleading information whereby the price of securities or similar assets may be materially affected,
2)	gives false or misleading information about the affairs of legal persons
a)	in public announcements on financial matters,
b)	in statutory accounts,
c)	in reports, accounts or statements to a general meeting or similar body or the management of the legal person,
d)	in notification to a registration authority, or
e)	in offering materials concerning the formation of the legal person or capital increase and concerning the sale of shares or the issue or sale of convertible bonds,
3)	grossly violates the legislation applicable to a legal person concerning
a)	capital contribution, or
b)	use of the legal person's funds,
4)	grossly fails to comply with requirements in the legislation applicable to a legal person concerning
a)	keeping of minutes,
b)	keeping of registers and disclosure obligations concerning ownership interests, or
c)	obligations to act upon established capital loss.
Subsection 2. Under particularly aggravating circumstances, the penalty for violation of subsection 1, no. 1, may be increased to imprisonment for any term not exceeding 6 years. Particularly aggravating circumstances shall be deemed to include, in particular, cases where the offence has been committed by several persons acting in concert, where considerable gain has been obtained or intended, or where a larger number of offences have been committed.
Subsection 3. If an act or omission as mentioned in subsection 1 is committed by gross negligence, the penalty shall be a fine or, under aggravating circumstances, imprisonment for any term not exceeding 4 months.

§ 297

Any person who disseminates false or misleading information whereby the price of goods, real property or similar assets may be materially affected shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 1 year and 6 months.
Subsection 2. If an act as mentioned in subsection 1 is committed by gross negligence, the penalty shall be a fine or, under aggravating circumstances, imprisonment for any term not exceeding 4 months.

§ 298

Any person who, without the conditions for applying

§ 279 being present,

1)	by false pretences concerning solvency obtains a loan or credit for himself or others with the consequence that a loss of property is thereby caused,
2)	by consumption of prepaid remuneration renders himself unable to deliver the counter-performance,
3)	removes himself without paying for lodging, food and drink, transport or other service in respect of which it has been a recognisable precondition that payment be made before removal,
4)	without payment of the fixed charge gains access to a performance, exhibition or assembly or to transport by public means of transport or to use of another publicly accessible facility,

shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 6 months.

§ 299

Any person who, without the conditions for applying § 280 being present, in a financial matter which the person concerned is under a duty to manage for another, by breach of his duty causes the latter a considerable loss of property which is not compensated before judgment at first instance, shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 1 year and 6 months.
Subsection 2. Any person who, in managing another person's financial affairs, receives, demands or allows himself to be promised a gift or other advantage in breach of duty for himself or others, as well as any person who grants, promises or offers such a gift or other advantage, shall be liable to a fine or imprisonment for any term not exceeding 4 years.

§ 299

a. Any person who, under particularly aggravating circumstances, commits a violation of section 19 of the Marketing Practices Act shall be liable to imprisonment for any term not exceeding 6 years. Particularly aggravating circumstances shall be deemed to include, in particular, cases where the act has caused considerable damage or has created an imminent danger thereof.

§ 299

b. Any person who, in order thereby to obtain for himself or others an unlawful gain or who otherwise under particularly aggravating circumstances commits
1)	copyright infringements of a particularly serious nature, cf. section 76, subsection 2, of the Copyright Act, or unlawful import of a particularly serious nature, cf. section 77, subsection 2, of the Copyright Act,
2)	trade mark infringements of a particularly serious nature, cf. section 42, subsection 2, of the Trade Marks Act,
3)	design infringements of a particularly serious nature, cf. section 36, subsection 2, of the Designs Act,
4)	patent infringements of a particularly serious nature, cf. section 57, subsection 2, of the Patents Act,
5)	utility model infringements of a particularly serious nature, cf. section 54, subsection 2, of the Utility Models Act, or
6)	violation of a particularly serious nature of section 91, cf.

§ 94

, subsection 2, of the Act on Radio and Television Broadcasting,

shall be liable to imprisonment for any term not exceeding 6 years.

§ 299

c. Any person who, under particularly aggravating circumstances, enters into a cartel agreement covered by section 23, subsection 3, of the Competition Act shall be liable to imprisonment for any term not exceeding 6 years. Particularly aggravating circumstances shall be deemed to include, in particular, cases where the violation has been of a considerable scale or has been likely to cause considerable damage.

§ 299

d. Any person who, under particularly aggravating circumstances, commits
1)	a violation of section 35, subsection 1, or section 39, subsection 1, of the Securities Trading Act, or
2)	a violation of Article 3(1)(a) or (c) or Article 5 of Regulation (EU) No 1227/2011 of the European Parliament and of the Council of 25 October 2011 on wholesale energy market integrity and transparency,
shall be liable to imprisonment for any term not exceeding 6 years.
Subsection 2. Particularly aggravating circumstances, cf. subsection 1, shall be deemed to include, in particular, cases where the offence has been committed by several persons acting in concert, where considerable gain has been obtained or intended, or where a larger number of offences have been committed.

This excerpt sits under: Udskriftsdato: 14. februar 2024 > kapitel i stedet for dommen til samfundstje

§ 300. Punishable by fine or imprisonment for up to 1 year

1) anyone who, at a time when he realizes or ought to realize that he is unable to satisfy his creditors, significantly worsens his financial position by incurring new debt or pays or provides security for significant overdue debts,
2) anyone who causes his creditors significant loss through extravagant lifestyle, through gambling, through risky ventures that are not proportionate to his assets, through highly disorderly business conduct or other reckless behavior,
3) the debtor and trustee who, in providing the statements required during restructuring proceedings, gives false information or is guilty of gross negligence.

§ 300

a. Punishable by fine or imprisonment for up to 6 months is anyone who, without the conditions for applying § 279 being present, unlawfully intentionally or through gross negligence causes a person who is in error to be induced thereby to an act or omission, and thereby causes him or someone for whom the act or omission becomes decisive a significant financial loss.

§ 300

b. Punishable by fine or imprisonment for up to 6 months is anyone who, without the conditions for applying § 282 being present, when entering into an agreement improperly takes advantage of the other party's financial difficulties or otherwise of that party's inferior position.

§ 300

c. Punishable by fine or imprisonment for up to 6 months is anyone who transfers a claim arising from another person's act of the nature mentioned in § 282, § 300 a or § 300 b, or who asserts such a claim, if he showed gross negligence with respect to its nature when acquiring the claim. Punishable in the same manner is anyone who otherwise through gross negligence derives improper advantage from another person's act of the nature mentioned in § 282, § 300 a or § 300 b.

§ 301

Punishable by fine or imprisonment for up to 1 year and 6 months is anyone who, with intent for unauthorized use, produces, obtains, possesses or transfers
1) information that identifies a means of payment assigned to others, or
2) generated payment card numbers.
Stk. 2. If the transfer etc. mentioned in stk. 1 takes place in a wider circle or under otherwise particularly aggravating circumstances, the punishment is imprisonment for up to 6 years.
Stk. 3. The provision in stk. 1 does not apply to genuine payment cards.

§ 301

a. Punishable by fine or imprisonment for up to 1 year and 6 months is anyone who unlawfully obtains or transfers codes or other means of access to information systems to which access is reserved for paying users, and which are protected by code or other special access restriction.
Stk. 2. If the transfer etc. mentioned in stk. 1 takes place under particularly aggravating circumstances, the punishment is imprisonment for up to 6 years. Particularly aggravating circumstances include in particular cases where the transfer
etc. takes place commercially, in a wider circle or under circumstances where there is a particular risk of extensive abuse.

§ 302

Punishable by fine or imprisonment for up to 1 year and 6 months is, insofar as the matter does not fall under § 296, anyone who particularly grossly violates the legislation's requirements for
1) bookkeeping, including registration of transactions and preparation of accounting material,
2) preservation of accounting material, including descriptions of bookkeeping and systems for storage and retrieval of material, including access codes etc. and encryption keys,
3) public authorities' access to accounting material pursuant to the legislation specifically applicable to these authorities, and
4) preparation of annual accounts or equivalent accounts.
Stk. 2. If an act or omission as mentioned in stk. 1 is committed through gross negligence, the punishment is fine or imprisonment for up to 4 months.

§ 303

Anyone who shows gross negligence by purchasing or otherwise receiving in a similar manner things that have been acquired through a property crime is punishable by fine or imprisonment for up to 1 year.

§ 304

Punishable by fine or imprisonment for up to 4 months is anyone who, in cases where a decision on a property matter is made by voting, obtains for himself or others access to participate unlawfully in this or to cast more votes than are due to him, or causes the voting to be distorted.
Stk. 2. Punishable in the same manner is anyone who, in voting in a bankruptcy or debt settlement estate or during restructuring proceedings, influences the voting through false pretenses or grants, promises or offers, receives, demands or allows himself to be promised a financial advantage for voting in a particular direction or for refraining from voting.

§ 304

a. Anyone who unlawfully grants, promises or offers anyone who acts as an arbitrator in this country or abroad a gift or other advantage to induce that person to do or omit something in the exercise of this office is punishable by fine or imprisonment for up to 4 years.

Stk. 2. Punishable in the same manner is anyone who acts as an arbitrator in this country or abroad and who, in the exercise of this office, unlawfully receives, demands or allows himself to be promised a gift or other advantage.

§ 305

The violations of the law referred to in § 291, stk. 1 and 3, § 293, stk. 2, § 298 and § 299 are prosecuted only at the request of the injured party, unless public considerations require prosecution.
Stk. 2. The violations of the law referred to in § 294 are subject to private prosecution.
29. Chapter
Special provisions on legal persons

§ 306

Companies etc. (legal persons) may be subject to criminal liability under the rules in Chapter 5 for violation of this Act.

Act no. 438 of 31 May 2000 (Time limitation of measures under sections 68 and 69 of the Criminal Code)2) contains the following entry into force provision:

§ 2

Stk. 1. The Act enters into force on 1 July 2000.
Stk. 2. Sections 68 a and 69 a of the Criminal Code as worded by section 1, nos. 1 and 3, of this Act apply to measures under sections 68 and 69 of the Criminal Code that are imposed after the entry into force of the Act. The same applies to measures that, after the entry into force of the Act, are determined under section 72 of the Criminal Code, cf.

§§ 68 and 69, and which result in an aggravation of the measure

Act no. 441 of 31 May 2000 (Limitation, strengthened efforts against sexual abuse of children and young people and IT investigation)3) contains the following entry into force provision:

§ 3

Stk. 1. The Act enters into force on 1 July 2000.
Stk. 2. The provisions mentioned in section 1 in section 94, stk. 4, and section 97, stk. 4 and 6, of the Criminal Code also apply to violations of the law that have been committed and legal consequences that have been imposed before the entry into force of the Act. However, the provisions do not apply in cases where limitation under the previous rules has occurred before the entry into force of the Act.

Act no. 433 of 31 May 2000 (Amendments as a result of the Sentence Enforcement Act, abolition of the detention penalty and conditional release of life prisoners etc.)4) contains the following entry into force provisions:

§ 30

The Act enters into force on 1 July 2001.

§ 31

Stk. 1. If, after the entry into force of the Act, punishment is to be imposed for a previously committed violation of the laws mentioned in

§§ 1-29

for which detention for up to 30 days would be due, imprisonment is imposed with the same number of days as detention.
Stk. 2. If a higher punishment of detention than mentioned in stk. 1 would be due, a lower punishment of imprisonment may be imposed, but not less than 30 days or more than 4 months.

§ 32

Stk. 1. After the entry into force of the Act, detention penalty cannot be imposed, even if penal provisions in other legislation still provide the possibility thereof.
Stk. 2. When applying penal provisions outside the laws mentioned in §§ 1-29, where detention is included in the sentencing range, imprisonment for up to 4 months may be imposed instead of detention.
Stk. 3.

§ 31 applies correspondingly

§ 33

Stk. 1. When determining substitute imprisonment for a fine concerning an offence committed before the entry into force of the Act, § 31 applies correspondingly.
Stk. 2. The Act has no effect on detention sentences or substitute imprisonment of detention that have been imposed or determined before the entry into force of the Act.

Act No. 258 of 8 May 2002 (Implementation of the EU Mutual Legal Assistance Convention, the 2nd Additional Protocol to the Council of Europe's Mutual Legal Assistance Convention and the EU Framework Decision on Joint Investigation Teams)5) contains the following provisions on criminal liability and entry into force:

§ 3

Stk. 1. The provisions of Chapter 14 of the Criminal Code on offences against public authority etc. and Chapter 16 on offences in public service or office etc. also apply when the conduct has been committed against or by officials from another state during the performance of tasks in Denmark pursuant to Articles 12 and 13 of the Convention of 29 May 2000 on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters between the Member States of the European Union and corresponding provisions in other EU legal acts or pursuant to Articles 18 and 20 of the 2nd Additional Protocol of 8 November 2001 to the European Convention of 20 April 1959 on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters.
Stk. 2. If an official from another Member State causes damage during the performance of tasks in Denmark pursuant to Articles 12 and 13 of the Convention of 29 May 2000 on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters between the Member States of the European Union and corresponding provisions in other EU legal acts or pursuant to Articles 18 and 20 of the 2nd Additional Protocol of 8 November 2001 to the European Convention of 20 April 1959 on Mutual Assistance in Criminal Matters, which under Danish law entails liability for compensation, compensation shall be paid by the Minister of Justice.

§ 6

The Act enters into force on 1 July 2002.

Act No. 364 of 24 May 2005 (Limitation, aggravation of the penalty for false prisoners etc.)6) contains the following provision on entry into force:

§ 2

Stk. 1. The Act enters into force on 1 July 2005.
Stk. 2.

§ 1

, no. 6, however, enters into force the day after publication in the Official Gazette.7)

Act No. 718 of 25 June 2010 (Reconstruction etc.)8) contains the following provision on entry into force:

§ 55

Stk. 1. The Minister of Justice determines the date of entry into force of the Act.9)
Stk. 2-9. (Omitted)
Stk. 10. Section 283(1)(2), section 300(3), and section 304(2) of the Criminal Code, as worded by section 11, nos. 1, 3 and 4 of this Act, apply correspondingly to negotiations on compulsory composition.

Act No. 1552 of 21 December 2010 (Tracing of hidden proceeds and other assets, limitation of confiscation claims, secret seizure etc.)10) contains the following provision on entry into force:

§ 3

Stk. 1. The Act enters into force on 1 January 2011.
Stk. 2. The provision in section 97a(1) of the Criminal Code referred to in § 1 also applies to offences committed and legal consequences imposed before the entry into force of the Act. However, the provision does not apply in cases where limitation under the previously applicable rules has occurred before the entry into force of the Act.

Act No. 158 of 28 February 2012 (Raising of the criminal age)11) contains the following provision on entry into force:

§ 5

Stk. 1. The Act enters into force the day after publication in the Official Gazette.12)
Stk. 2. Where it is to be included as an aggravating circumstance in determining the penalty that the offender has previously been punished in a manner relevant to the case, decisions made in relation to persons for acts committed before they had reached the age of 15 shall not be taken into account.

Act No. 1242 of 18 December 2012 (Revision of the rules on service etc.)13) contains the following provision on entry into force:

§ 5

Stk. 1. The Act enters into force on 1 July 2013, cf. however subsection 2.
Stk. 2-3. (Omitted)

Act No. 1385 of 23 December 2012 (Introduction of imprisonment in cartel cases, raising of the fine level, mitigation of penalties, amended case processes etc.)14) contains the following provision on entry into force:

§ 3

The Act enters into force on 1 March 2013.

Act No. 431 of 1 May 2013 (Export of firearms etc. for civilian use to countries outside the EU, easing of the control scheme for certain hardball and paintball weapons etc.)15) contains the following provision on entry into force:

§ 3

Stk. 1. The Act enters into force on 1 June 2013, cf. however subsection 2.
Stk. 2.

§ 1

, nos. 4, 5 and 7, and § 2 enter into force on 30 September 2013.

Act No. 434 of 1 May 2013 (Strengthened action against coercion in connection with marriages and religious ceremonies)16) contains the following provision on entry into force:

§ 4

Stk. 1. The Act enters into force the day after publication in the Official Gazette, cf. however subsection 2.17)
Stk. 2-4. (Omitted)

Act No. 628 of 12 June 2013 (Extended possibility for parole and electronic monitoring sentence, state educational support during school periods in the training as prison officer etc.)18) contains the following provision on entry into force:

§ 4

Stk. 1. The Act enters into force on 1 July 2013, cf. however subsection 2.
Stk. 2.

§ 1

, no. 4, enters into force the day after publication in the Official Gazette.19)
Stk. 3-4. (Omitted)

Act No. 633 of 12 June 2013 (Sexual offences)20) contains the following provision on entry into force:

§ 5

Stk. 1. The Act enters into force on 1 July 2013.
Stk. 2.

§ 1

, no. 4, also applies to offences committed before the entry into force of the Act, unless limitation under the previously applicable rules has occurred before the entry into force of the Act.
Stk. 3. Section 236(4) and (6) of the Criminal Code, as worded by section 1, no. 27 of this Act, applies to offences committed before the entry into force of the Act, instead of the previously applicable rules.
Stk. 4. Section 236(6) of the Criminal Code, as worded by section 1, no. 27 of this Act, also applies to orders given before the entry into force of the Act under the previously applicable rules in section 236 of the Criminal Code. When deciding whether such an order is to be maintained, section 236(1), (3) and (5) of the Criminal Code, as worded by section 1, no. 27 of this Act, applies.
Stk. 5. Section 236(7) of the Criminal Code, as worded by section 1, no. 27 of this Act, also applies to orders given before the entry into force of the Act under the previously applicable rules in section 236 of the Criminal Code.

Act No. 634 of 12 June 2013 (Strengthened action against economic crime)21) contains the following provision on entry into force:

§ 13

Stk. 1. The Act enters into force on 1 July 2013.
Stk. 2.

§ 1

, nos. 3 and 4, applies to confiscation claims imposed or accepted before the entry into force of the Act, unless limitation under the previously applicable rules has occurred before the entry into force of the Act.
Stk. 3. (Omitted)

Act No. 642 of 12 June 2013 (Implementation of provisions in the Regulation on integrity and transparency of wholesale energy markets (REMIT Regulation) on powers, sanctions and publication and rollout of remotely read electricity meters etc.)22) contains the following provision on entry into force:

§ 5

Stk. 1. The Act enters into force on 15 June 2013, cf. however subsection 2.
Stk. 2.

§ 3

enters into force on 1 July 2013.

Ministry of Justice, 22 August 2013
MORTEN BødsKOV
/ Freja Sine Thorsboe

1)  The insertion of the reference to Regulation No. 258/2012 enters into force on 30 September 2013.
2)  The amendment concerns § 68a, § 69, § 69a, § 72(1)-(2), § 73(1), 1st sentence, and § 97(2)(2).
3)  The amendment concerns § 93(3), 1st sentence, § 94(4), § 97(4), § 97(6), 2nd sentence, § 230 and § 235.
4)  The amendment concerns § 7, § 8, § 21, § 23, § 31, § 32, § 33, § 34, § 35, § 36, § 39, § 40a, § 41, § 42, § 43, § 44, § 45, § 46, § 47, § 48, § 49, § 50, § 51,

§ 52

, § 53, § 54, § 55, § 57, § 58, § 59, § 60, § 61, § 61a, § 62, § 63, § 64, § 65, § 66, § 72, § 74, § 78, § 83, § 86, § 87, § 88, § 89, § 90, § 91, § 97 § 100,

§ 103

, § 104, § 109, § 110, § 110 a, § 110 c, § 110 e, § 114, § 117, § 119, § 121, § 122, § 123, § 124, § 125, § 126, § 127, § 128, § 129, § 129 a, § 130, §
131, § 132 a, § 133, § 134, § 134 a, § 135, § 136, § 137, § 138, § 139, § 140, § 141, § 142, § 143, § 144, § 147, § 148, § 149, § 150, § 152, § 153, § 155,

§ 156

, § 158, § 160, § 161, § 162, § 163, § 164, § 165, § 167, § 168, § 170, § 172, § 174, § 175, § 176, § 178, § 179, § 182, § 183, § 184, § 185, § 186, §
187, § 188, § 189, § 192, § 193, § 194, § 195 § 197, § 202, § 203, § 204, § 206, § 208, § 213, § 214, § 223 a, § 229, § 232, § 233, § 235, § 236, § 239, §
240, § 241, § 244, § 249, § 251, § 252, § 253, § 254, § 255, § 260, § 261, § 262, § 263, § 264, § 264 a, § 264 d, § 265, § 266, § 266 a, § 266 b, § 266 c, §
267, § 268, § 274, § 285, § 291, § 292, § 293, § 295, § 296, § 298, § 299, § 300, § 300 a, § 300 b, § 300 c, 302, § 303 and § 304.
5)  The amendment concerns § 158, subsection 1, 1st sentence.
6)  The amendment concerns § 93, § 93 a, § 94, § 97 a and § 164, subsection 3.
7)  The Act was published in the Law Gazette on 25 May 2005. Section 1, no. 6, of the Act concerns § 164, subsection 3.
8)  The amendment concerns § 283, subsection 1, no. 2, and subsection 2, § 300, no. 3, and § 304, subsection 2.
9)	By Executive Order no. 208 of 15 March 2011, it is provided that the amending Act enters into force on 1 April 2011.
10)  The amendment concerns § 97 a, subsections 1-4.
11)  The amendment concerns § 15 and § 81, no. 10.
12)  The Act was published in the Law Gazette on 29 February 2012.
13)  The amendment concerns § 94, subsection 5.
14)  The amendment concerns § 299 c.
15)  The amendment concerns § 192 a, subsection 1.
16)  The amendment concerns § 260, subsection 2.
17)  The Act was published in the Law Gazette on 2 May 2013.
18)  The amendment concerns § 38, subsections 3 and 4, § 40 a, subsection 1, no. 1, and subsection 7, and § 124, subsections 5 and 6.
19)  The Act was published in the Law Gazette on 13 June 2013. Section 1, no. 4, of the Act concerns § 124, subsections 5 and 6.
20)  The amendment concerns § 7 a, subsection 2, no. 4, § 68 a, subsection 2, 1st sentence, § 69 a, subsection 2, 1st sentence, § 70, subsection 2, no. 1, § 93, subsection 3, § 94, subsection 4, § 210, subsections 1 and 3,
the heading of Chapter 24, §§ 216-233 a, §§ 235-236 and § 262 a.
21)  The amendment concerns § 79, subsection 2, 2nd sentence, § 93, subsection 2, no. 1, § 97 a, subsections 1 and 4, § 122, § 131, § 296, subsection 2, § 299, § 299 d and § 304 a, subsection 1.
22)  The amendment concerns § 299 d.

Annex
Table of Contents

General Part
1.	Chapter	Introductory provisions	§§	1-2
2.	Chapter	General conditions for the application of criminal provisions	§§	3-12
3.	Chapter	Conditions of criminal liability	§§	13-20
4.	Chapter	Attempt and complicity	§§	21-24
5.	Chapter	Criminal liability of legal persons	§§	25-27
6.	Chapter	Penalties	§§	31-55
7.	Chapter	Conditional sentences	§§	56-61
8.	Chapter	Community service	§§	62-67
9.	Chapter	Other legal consequences of the criminal act	§§	68-79
10.	Chapter	Determination of the penalty	§§	80-89 a
11.	Chapter	Termination of the legal consequences of the criminal act	§§	92-97 c
Special Part
12.	Chapter	Offences against the independence and security of the State	§§	98-110 f
13.	Chapter	Offences against the Constitution and the supreme authorities of the State, terrorism, etc.	§§	111-118 a
14.	Chapter	Offences against public authority, etc.	§§	119-132 a
15.	Chapter	Offences against public order and peace	§§	133-142
16.	Chapter	Offences in public service or office, etc.	§§	144-157 b
17.	Chapter	False testimony and false accusation	§§	158-165
18.	Chapter	Offences concerning means of payment	§§	166-170
19.	Chapter	Offences concerning means of evidence	§§	171-179
20.	Chapter	Offences dangerous to the public	§§	180-192 b
21.	Chapter	Various acts harmful to the public	§§	193-196
22.	Chapter	Begging and harmful commercial activity	§§	197-204
23.	Chapter	Offences in family relations	§§	208-215
24.	Chapter	Sexual offences	§§	216-236
25.	Chapter	Offences against life and limb	§§	237-254
26.	Chapter	Offences against personal liberty	§§	260-262 a
27.	Chapter	Violations of privacy and honour	§§	263-275
28.	Chapter	Property offences	§§	276-305
29.	Chapter	Special provisions on legal persons	§	306
