DECREE No. 520

DECREE No. 520
THE LEGISLATIVE ASSEMBLY OF THE REPUBLIC OF EL SALVADOR, CONSIDERING:

I.-	That the Constitution recognizes the human person as the origin and end of the activity of the State, which is organized for the attainment of justice, legal security and the common good. Consequently, it is the obligation of the State to ensure for the persons inhabiting the Republic, the enjoyment of freedom, health, culture, economic well-being and social justice. Likewise, Article 144 establishes that international treaties entered into by El Salvador with other States or with international organizations, constitute Laws of the Republic.
II.-	That by means of Legislative Decree No. 430, dated August 23, 1995, published in the Official Gazette No. 154, Volume No. 328, of that same date, the Inter-American Convention to Prevent, Punish and Eradicate Violence against Women, "Convention of Belem do Pará", was ratified, which establishes the obligation of the States parties to include in their domestic legislation criminal, civil and administrative norms; as well as those of another nature that are necessary to prevent, punish and eradicate violence against women.
III.-	That it is necessary to have legislation that adequately regulates the policy of detection, prevention, attention, protection, reparation and punishment, for the eradication of all forms of violence against women and respect for their human rights as an obligation of the State; it becomes indispensable, the introduction of a legal instrument that adequately guides public and private actions in favor of women, and that guarantees a better quality of life and an advancement in their capacities in an integral manner.
IV.-	That violations of human rights derived from the different forms of violence that affect life, integrity and citizen security, have a differentiated impact according to the gender of the victims; since any aggression perpetrated against a woman is directly linked to the unequal distribution of power and to the asymmetric relations between women and men in society.
V.-	That the inequalities of power between men and women perpetuated through violence, do not allow women to fully exercise their rights in the social, political, economic, cultural and family fields, denying them access to a life free of violence, which constitutes a violation of their human rights and fundamental freedoms; for which reason it is necessary to legislate in an integral manner through measures that include the detection, prevention, attention, protection, reparation and punishment of violence against women in any of its manifestations.

THEREFORE,
in the exercise of its constitutional powers, and at the initiative of the Deputies: Lorena Guadalupe Peña Mendoza, Irma Lourdes Palacios Vásquez, Federico Guillermo Ávila Qüehl, Ana Lucía Baires de Martínez, Eduardo Enrique Barrientos Zepeda, Carmen Elena Calderón Sol de Escalón, José Alvaro Cornejo Mena, Nery Arely Díaz de Rivera, Margarita Escobar, Emma Julia Fabián Hernández, Carmen Elena Figueroa Rodríguez, Gloria Elizabeth Gómez de Salgado, Hortensia Margarita López Quintana, Mario Marroquín Mejía, Manuel Vicente Menjívar Esquivel, Mariella Peña Pinto, Sonia Margarita Rodríguez Sigüenza, Ana Silvia Romero, Sandra Marlene Salgado García, Rodrigo Samayoa Rivas, Manuel Rigoberto Soto Lazo, Enrique Alberto Luis Valdés Soto, Donato Eugenio Vaquerano Rivas, Margarita Velado; with adherence thereto of the Deputies: Lucía del Carmen Ayala de León, Patricia María Salazar Mejía, Patricia Elena Valdivieso de Gallardo; and with support thereto of the Deputies: José Francisco Merino López, Alberto Armando Romero Rodríguez, Francisco Roberto Lorenzana Durán,César Humberto García Aguilera, Elizardo González Lovo, Roberto José d'Aubuisson Munguía, Karla Gisela Abrego Cáceres, Félix Agreda Chachagua, Ernesto Antonio Angulo Milla, Marta Lorena Araujo, José Orlando Arévalo Pineda, Fernando Alberto José Ávila Quetglas, Ana Lucía Baires de Martínez, Reynaldo Antonio López Cardoza, José Vidal Carrillo Delgado, Darío Alejandro Chicas Argueta, Norma Cristina Cornejo Amaya, Carlos Cortez Hernández, Blanca Noemí Coto Estrada, Rosa Alma Cruz de Henríquez, Ana Vilma Castro de Cabrera, Omar Arturo Escobar Oviedo, José Rinaldo Garzona Villeda, Medardo González Trejo, José Nelson Guardado Menjivar, Iris Marisol Guerra Henríquez, Norma Fidelia Guevara de Ramirios, Carlos Walter Guzman Coto, Gladis Marina Landaverde Paredes, Mildred Guadalupe Machado Argueta, Segundo Alejandro Dagoberto Marroquín, Ana Guadalupe Martínez Menéndez, Heidy Carolina Mira Saravia, Edgar Alfonso Montoya Martínez, Rafael Ricardo Moran Tobar, Ana Virginia Morataya Gómez, Yeimi Elizabeth Muñoz Moran, José Margarito Nolasco Díaz, María Irma Elizabeth Orellana Osorio, Rubén Orellana, Rafael Eduardo Paz Velis, Mario Antonio Ponce López, Zoila Beatriz Quijada Solís, Carlos René Retana Martínez, David Ernesto Reyes Molina, Javier Ernesto Reyes Palacios, Dolores Alberto Rivas Echeverría, Gilberto Rivera Mejía, Jackeline Noemí Rivera Avalos, Pedrina Rivera Hernández, Cesar René Florentín Reyes Dheming, Luis Enrique Salamanca Martínez, Marcos Francisco Salazar Umaña, Karina Ivette Sosa de Lara, Jaime Gilberto Valdez Hernández, Mario Eduardo Valiente Ortiz, Guadalupe Antonio Vásquez Martínez, Ana Daysi Villalobos de Cruz, Francisco José Zablah Safie, Ciro Alexis Zepeda Menjivar,
DECREES the following:
COMPREHENSIVE SPECIAL LAW FOR A LIFE FREE OF VIOLENCE FOR WOMEN

Title I

Guarantee and Application of the Law

Chapter I Preliminary Provisions

Article 1.- Object of the Law

The purpose of this Law is to establish, recognize and guarantee the right of women to a life free of violence, by means of Public Policies oriented to the detection, prevention, attention, protection, reparation and punishment of violence against women; in order to protect their right to life, physical and moral integrity, freedom, non-discrimination, dignity, effective protection, personal security, real equality and equity.

Article 2.- Right of Women to a Life Free of Violence

The right of women to a life free of violence includes being free from all forms of discrimination, being valued and educated free from stereotyped patterns of behavior, social and cultural practices based on concepts of inferiority or subordination.
Likewise, it refers to the enjoyment, exercise and protection of human rights and freedoms enshrined in the Constitution and in the National and International Instruments on the matter in force, including the right to:
1.	That their life and their physical, psychological and moral integrity be respected.
2.	That the dignity inherent to their person be respected and protection be provided to their family.
3.	Freedom and personal security.
4.	Not to be subjected to torture or humiliating treatment.
5.	Equal protection before the Law and of the Law.
6.	A simple and rapid remedy before competent courts that protect them against acts that violate their rights.
7.	Freedom of association.
8.	To profess religion and beliefs.
9.	To participate in public affairs including public offices.

Article 3.- Scope of Application

This Law shall apply for the benefit of women who are in the national territory, whether they are nationals or not, or who having the status of Salvadorans, are outside the national territory, provided that the actions or omissions dealt with in this Law can be prosecuted based on parameters of extraterritoriality.

Article 4.- Guiding Principles

The guiding principles of this Law are:
a) Specialization: It is the right to differentiated and specialized attention, according to the specific needs and circumstances of women and especially, of those who are in conditions of vulnerability or risk.
b) FAVORABILITY: IN CASE OF CONFLICT OR DOUBT ABOUT THE APPLICATION OF THE PROVISIONS CONTAINED IN THIS LAW, THE MOST FAVORABLE TO WOMEN FACING VIOLENCE SHALL PREVAIL, EXCEPT IN THOSE PROVISIONS THAT

REFER TO THE ESTABLISHMENT OF FACTS OR THE ASSESSMENT OF EVIDENCE. (1)
c) Integrality: It refers to the coordination and articulation of State Institutions for the eradication of violence against women.
d) Intersectorality: It is the principle that supports the articulation of programs, actions and resources of different sectors and actors at national and local level, for the detection, prevention, attention, protection and sanction, as well as for the reparation of damage to victims.
e) Secularism: It refers to the fact that no custom, tradition, or religious consideration may be invoked to justify violence against women.
f) Absolute priority: It refers to respect for women's right to a life free of violence, in any sphere.

Article 5.- Subjects of Rights

This Law shall be applied for the benefit of women, without distinction of age, who are in the national territory; for this purpose, all forms of discrimination are prohibited, understood as any distinction, exclusion, restriction or arbitrary differentiation based on sex, age, sexual identity, family status, rural or urban origin, ethnic origin, economic condition, nationality, religion or beliefs, physical, mental or sensory disability, or any analogous cause, whether it comes from the State, its agents or private individuals.

Article 6.- Obligated Subjects

Obligated subjects for the purposes of this Law are any natural or legal person, who is or acts in Salvadoran territory, who must comply with and enforce the provisions of this Law, whatever their nationality, domicile or residence.

Article 7.- Relations of Power or Trust

For the application and interpretation of this Law, it is presumed that the types and modalities of violence contemplated in this Law have as their origin the unequal relationship of power or trust; in which, women are in a position of disadvantage with respect to men, consisting of:
a) Relations of power: They are those characterized by asymmetry, domination and control of one or more persons over another or others.
b) Relations of trust: They are those based on the assumptions of loyalty, credibility, honesty and security that are established between two or more persons.
Inequality in relations of power or trust may subsist, even when the bond that originated them has ended, regardless of the sphere in which they took place.

Article 8.- Definitions

For the purposes of this Law, the following shall be understood as:
a) Comprehensive Attention: They are all actions to detect, attend to, protect and restore the rights of women facing any type of violence; for which, the State must allocate the necessary and appropriate human, logistical and financial resources to establish specialized services that guarantee the restitution of rights and the annulment of risks or further damages.
b) Labor Harassment: It is the action of physical or psychological hostility, which systematically and recurrently, is exercised over a woman because she is a woman in the workplace, with the purpose of isolating, intimidating or destroying the communication networks of the person facing these acts, damaging her reputation, discrediting the work performed or disturbing or obstructing the exercise of her duties.
c) Unlearning: It is the process by which a person or group of persons, destructures or invalidates what has been learned by considering it subject to questioning or inappropriate for their own development and that of the community to which they belong.
d) Misogyny: They are conducts of hatred, implicit or explicit, against everything related to the feminine such as rejection, aversion and contempt against women.
e) Aggressor: Whoever exercises any of the types of violence against women, in an unequal relationship of power and in any of its modalities.
f) Prevention: They are norms and policies to reduce violence against women by intervening from the identified causes thereof, and whose objective is to avoid its reproduction and reduce the probability of appearance of the problem; therefore, they are aimed at transforming the risk environment and strengthening the skills and conditions of persons and communities for its eradication, ensuring rapid and effective identification, as well as the reduction of impacts and sequels when the problem and recidivism occur.
g) Sexist Advertising: It is any form of advertising that transmits values, roles, stereotypes, attitudes, feminine and masculine conducts, verbal and non-verbal language, that promote discrimination, subordination, violence and misogyny.
h) Relearning: It is the process through which persons assimilate knowledge or conduct after its androcentric deconstruction, from a critical and non-traditional vision as a product of new relationships established with their natural social environment.
i) Revictimize: They are actions that have as their purpose or result causing suffering to direct or indirect victims of acts of violence contemplated or not in this Law, through actions or omissions such as: rejection, indolence, indifference, disqualification, minimization of facts, unjustified delay in processes,

lack of credibility, blaming, lack of protection, denial and unjustified lack of effective assistance.
j) Sexism: It is any discrimination based on sexual difference that affects all relationships between human beings and encompasses all daily dimensions of private or public life that defines feelings, conceptions, attitudes and actions.
k) Violence against Women: It is any action based on their gender, that causes death, damage or physical, sexual or psychological suffering to women both in the public and private sphere.
l) Direct Victim: It refers to any woman whose right to live free of violence is violated, regardless of whether the aggressor is reported, individualized, apprehended, prosecuted or convicted.
m) Indirect Victim: It is any person whose right to live a life free of violence is violated or who suffers damages by intervening to assist the direct victim or prevent their victimization, regardless of the type of relationship that exists between them.

Article 9.- Types of Violence

For the purposes of this Law, the following are considered types of violence:
a) Economic Violence: Any action or omission by the aggressor that affects the economic survival of the woman, which manifests itself through acts aimed at limiting, controlling or preventing the income of her economic earnings.
b) Feminicidal Violence: The extreme form of gender-based violence against women, resulting from the violation of their human rights, in the public and private spheres, formed by the set of misogynistic conducts that lead to social or State impunity, and may culminate in feminicide and other forms of violent death of women.
c) Physical Violence: Any conduct that directly or indirectly is directed at causing harm or physical suffering to the woman, with the result or risk of producing physical injury or harm, exercised by whoever is or has been her spouse or by whoever is or has been linked to her by an analogous relationship of affection, even without cohabitation. Likewise, acts of physical violence against the woman exercised by the aggressor in her family, social or work environment shall be considered as such.
d) Psychological and Emotional Violence: Any direct or indirect conduct that causes emotional harm, diminishes self-esteem, damages or disturbs the healthy development of the woman; whether this conduct is verbal or non-verbal, that produces devaluation or suffering in the woman, through threats, demands for obedience or submission, coercion, blaming or limitations of her sphere of freedom, and any alteration in her health that triggers the distortion of the concept of herself, of her value as a person, of her vision of the world or of her own affective capacities, exercised in

any type of relationship.
e) Patrimonial Violence: Actions, omissions or conducts that affect the free disposal of the woman's patrimony; including damage to common or own property through the transformation, removal, destruction, misappropriation, damage, loss, limitation, retention of objects, personal documents, goods, assets and patrimonial rights. Consequently, acts of concealment, simulated alienation of movable or immovable property shall be null and void; whatever the patrimonial regime of the marriage, including that of the non-marital union.
f) Sexual Violence: Any conduct that threatens or violates the right of the woman to voluntarily decide her sexual life, understood to include not only the sexual act but any form of contact or sexual access, genital or non-genital, regardless of whether the aggressor maintains or not a conjugal, partner, social, work, affective or kinship relationship with the woman victim.
g) Symbolic Violence: Messages, values, icons or signs that transmit and reproduce relations of domination, inequality and discrimination in the social relations established between people and naturalize the subordination of women in society.

Article 10.- Modalities of Violence

For the purposes of this Law, the following are considered modalities of Violence:
a) Community Violence: Any abusive action or omission that, based on individual or collective acts, transgresses the fundamental rights of women and promotes their denigration, discrimination, marginalization or exclusion.
b) Institutional Violence: Any abusive action or omission by any public servant that discriminates or has the purpose of delaying, obstructing or preventing the enjoyment and exercise of the fundamental rights and freedoms of women; as well as that which intends to obstruct or obstructs women's access to the enjoyment of public policies intended to prevent, address, investigate, punish and eradicate the manifestations, types and modalities of violence conceptualized in this Law.
c) Labor Violence: Actions or omissions against women, exercised repeatedly and maintained over time in public or private workplaces, that constitute physical or psychological aggressions against their integrity, personal and professional dignity, that obstruct their access to employment, promotion or stability therein, or that violate the right to equal pay for equal work.

Article 11.- Interpretation

This Law shall be interpreted and applied in accordance with the provisions of the Inter-American Convention to Prevent, Punish and Eradicate Violence against Women, the Convention on the Elimination of All Forms of Discrimination against Women, the Convention on the Rights of the

Child, the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and its Protocol to Prevent, Suppress and Punish Trafficking in Persons, Especially Women and Children, supplementing the United Nations Convention against Transnational Organized Crime and other International Human Rights Instruments in force.

Chapter II Governance

Article 12.- Governing Institution and its Purpose

The Salvadoran Institute for the Development of Women is the governing institution of this Law; and its purpose is:
a) To ensure, monitor and guarantee the comprehensive compliance and execution of the Law.
b) To coordinate the joint actions of the institutions of the public administration for the compliance with the National Policy for Women's Access to a Life Free of Violence.
c) To formulate Public Policies for Women's Access to a Life Free of Violence, to the Organs of the State, Autonomous and Municipal Institutions.
d) To convene in a consultative or coordinating capacity civil society organizations, universities, international organizations and cooperation agencies.

Article 13

Functions and Powers of the Salvadoran Institute for the Development of Women
Under this Law, the Salvadoran Institute for the Development of Women has the following powers:
a) To prepare a framework policy that shall be the reference for the design of the public policies referred to in this Law.
b) To present proposals to State institutions for Public Policies for Women's Access to a Life Free of Violence.
c) To approve, modify, monitor, evaluate and ensure compliance with the National Policy for Women's Access to a Life Free of Violence, as defined in this Law.
d) To define strategies and manage national or local emergency situations, in order to prevent and detect acts of violence against women.
e) To submit an annual report to the Legislative Organ on the state and situation of violence against women in accordance with this Law and with the international commitments acquired in this matter.

f) To establish mechanisms and actions for coordination and communication with the Organs of the State, Municipal Governments and other Autonomous Institutions.
g) To conduct evaluations and recommendations on the application of this Law.
h) Other actions that are indispensable and convenient for the better performance of its objectives, the adequate compliance with this Law or that are attributed to it in other Laws.

Article 14.- Specialized Technical Commission

To guarantee the operationalization of this Law and that of the Public Policies for Women's Access to a Life Free of Violence, the Specialized Technical Commission is created, whose coordination shall be the responsibility of the Salvadoran Institute for Women's Development and shall be composed of one representative from each institution that forms part of the board of directors of said Institute, as well as one representative from the following institutions:
a)	Judicial Branch.
b)	Ministry of Finance.
c)	Ministry of Governance.
d)	Ministry of Foreign Affairs.
e)	Ministry of Economy.
f)	One person designated by the Presidency of the Republic.
g)	Ministry of Agriculture and Livestock.

Article 15.- Members of the Specialized Technical Commission

To be a member of the Specialized Technical Commission, the representatives of each of the institutions must meet the following profile:
a)	Demonstrable honorability.
b)	Not having been convicted of crimes in the last ten years.
c)	Specialization in matters of women's rights.
d)	Awareness of respect for and compliance with women's human rights.
The Functions of the Technical Commission shall be established based on work instructions formulated by the institutions that comprise it and must be in accordance with the National Policy for Women's Access to a Life Free of Violence.

Chapter III

National Policy for Women's Access to a Life Free of Violence Article 16.- National Policy for Women's Access to a Life Free of Violence
The National Policy for Women's Access to a Life Free of Violence, hereinafter National Policy, is the set of objectives and strategies of a public nature that has as its purpose to guarantee women's right to a life free of violence, through its prevention, detection, care and protection. Its Action Plan shall have a period of five years.

Article 17

Contents of the National Policy for Women's Access to a Life Free of Violence
The National Policy must contain programs for:
a)	Detection, which have as their purpose the early identification and targeting of the factors that originate acts of violence against women both in the public and private spheres, establishing detection models according to the types and modalities of violence contemplated in this Law.
b)	Prevention, which have as their purpose to prevent violence against women in any of its types and modalities, based on the unlearning of conventional models that have historically been attributed to the image and concept of women, and the relearning of new models based on principles of equality, equity, diversity and democracy.
c)	Care, which have as their purpose to attend to, protect and restore, in an expeditious and effective manner, the rights of direct and indirect victims of any type of violence exercised against women, both in the public and private spheres.
d)	Protection, which have as their purpose to attend to and favor in a comprehensive manner the rights of women victims of violence, whether or not they are in a situation of risk.
e)	Eradication of violence against women, which have as their purpose the destructuring of social and cultural practices, conducts, norms and customs that are detrimental to the identity, dignity and physical and emotional integrity of women, or that place them in conditions of vulnerability.
f)	Citizen security, through the design of strategies that promote safe public spaces for women, the creation of maps locating territorial violence, national and local citizen networks, as well as institutions that actively participate in the detection and prevention of violence against women.
g)	Training and capacity building, which facilitates labor insertion and income generation for women who face acts of violence.

h)	Development of studies and research on violence against women at the national level.
Likewise, the National Policy, for its compliance and implementation, must contain programs for awareness, knowledge and specialization for service provider personnel for the detection, prevention, care and protection of cases of violence against women, as well as Protocols of Action and Coordination with the different State Institutions.

Article 18

Compliance with and articulation of the National Policy for Women's Access to a Life Free of Violence
State Institutions according to their competencies must adopt and execute the programs and actions for the eradication of violence against women established in the National Policy.

Article 19.- Citizen Participation

The mechanisms of citizen participation and representation at the national and local levels must include within their regulations or bylaws, actions to eradicate violence against women in coherence with the National Policy.

Chapter IV Responsibilities of the State

First Section Ministerial Responsibilities

Article 20.- Responsibilities in the Educational Sphere

The Ministry of Education through formal and non-formal teaching-learning educational programs and processes, at the levels of education: preschool, basic, secondary, higher and non-university, shall include within the obligation it has to plan and regulate in a comprehensive manner the training of educators, as well as in curricular and extracurricular activities, the promotion of women's right to live free of violence and discrimination, as well as the dissemination of measures aimed at the prevention and eradication of any type of violence against women, fostering for this purpose relationships of respect, equality and promotion of women's human rights.
Likewise, they must eliminate from all educational programs the regulations, bylaws and materials that directly or indirectly promote any of the forms of violence against women, the patterns of conduct, prejudices and stereotyped customs that promote, legitimize, naturalize, render invisible and justify violence against women, for which purpose, the Ministry of Education must guarantee that the contents of all materials circulating within the educational system comply with what is established in this Law.
Persons who exercise the direction of public and private educational centers must

adopt the necessary measures for the detection and attention of acts of violence against women within the school environment, in accordance with what is established in the National Policy.

Article 21.- Higher Education

The Ministry of Education, in the sphere of Higher Education, shall guarantee in undergraduate university studies and in postgraduate programs related to the areas of this Law, knowledge oriented toward the prevention and research for the eradication of violence against women and the promotion of relations of equality and non-discrimination.
Higher education institutions must internally regulate the actions for detection and prevention of all forms of violence against women.

Article 22.- Responsibilities of the Ministry of Governance

The Ministry of Governance through:
a) The General Directorate of Public Entertainment, Radio and Television, shall protect and defend the image of women in the broadest sense in accordance with the constitutional principles of respect for human dignity and fundamental rights.
Guaranteeing for such purpose that advertisers, media outlets and advertising agencies, including electronic, computer and telematic ones, whose activity is subject to the scope of advertising and communications, do not disseminate content nor broadcast spaces or sexist advertising against women, this being considered as such when it promotes aggressiveness, mistreatment or discrimination against women, health, dignity and equality.
For compliance with the foregoing, the Ministry of Governance, through the General Directorate of Public Entertainment, Radio and Television, shall guarantee the observance and application of the Codes of Ethics of the media outlets.
b) The National System of Civil Protection, Disaster Prevention and Mitigation through the National Commission of Civil Protection, Disaster Prevention and Mitigation, must guarantee that in situations of risk and disaster, attention to women is designed and executed taking into account their condition of gender vulnerability and the needs specific to their sex, for which actions and measures for prevention, attention and protection from the different modalities of violence against women must be incorporated into the National Plan of Civil Protection, Disaster Prevention and Mitigation.
Among others, the following measures may be adopted:
1) Establish physical spaces segregated by men and women to prevent situations of violence.
2) Sanitary, medical and psychosocial care that takes into account the environment of risk of violence and specific needs of women.

3) Exclusion of potential aggressors who show conduct of violence, harassment and stalking toward women.
4) Establish administrative procedures for the equitable delivery of resources according to the responsibilities that women face.

Article 23.- Responsibilities of the Ministry of Public Health and Social Assistance

The Ministry of Public Health and Social Assistance shall be responsible for:
a) Guaranteeing specific measures in the scope of public health services for the prevention, early detection, attention and intervention in cases of violence against women.
b) Incorporating the necessary measures for monitoring and evaluation of the impact on the health of women affected by violence, giving special attention to mental and emotional health.
c) The prevention and early detection of situations of violence against women shall be an objective in the scope of public health services.
d) Guaranteeing the non-discrimination of women regarding access to health services, as well as ensuring that health personnel do not exercise any type of violence against users of the services, without imposing their beliefs or prejudices during the provision thereof.
e) Statistically recording cases of violence against women manifested through illnesses, accidents and ailments attended within the public health service.
f) Preparing an annual report regarding the number of women who have been attended and identified in situations of violence, which shall be sent to the Specialized Technical Committee and to the National Data and Statistics System.
g) Guaranteeing compliance throughout the National Health System with Internal Regulations regarding care procedures for women, as well as their knowledge of and access to those procedures.

Article 24.- Responsibilities of the Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare

The State, through the Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare, in both the public and private sectors, shall guarantee:
a) The carrying out in workplaces of awareness-raising and prevention actions regarding any type of violence against female workers that affects their conditions of access, promotion, remuneration or training.

b) That absences or lack of punctuality at work motivated by the physical or psychological situation derived from any type of violence shall be considered justified.
c) The protection of the labor rights of female workers who face acts of violence.
In cases where women find themselves in cycles of violence and complaint processes, if they so request, arrangements shall be made with the employer for temporary or permanent relocation of their workplace, in the case of companies that have branches; as well as the reorganization of their schedules, in the terms determined in Labor Agreements, International Treaties and current legislation.

Article 25

Creation of Institutional Units of Specialized Care for Women
The Institutional Units of Specialized Care are hereby created for women who face acts of violence, whose purpose shall be to provide comprehensive services in hygienic and private conditions, with quality and warmth of care, with priority to crisis care; as well as to advise and inform about the rights that assist them, the measures relating to their protection and safety, emergency and shelter services, including the location where these services are provided and the status of the legal or administrative proceedings of their complaints.
A specialized care unit shall exist in the following institutions and in their corresponding departmental delegations:
1. Judicial Branch.
2. Attorney General's Office of the Republic.
3. Attorney General's Office of the Republic.
4. Office of the Ombudsman for Human Rights.
5. National Civil Police.
6. Institute of Legal Medicine.
7. Ministry of Public Health and Social Assistance.
8. Others that have jurisdiction in the matter.
The Salvadoran Institute for the Development of Women shall be in charge of ensuring and supervising that the care of the units is provided in the manner provided in the first paragraph of this article.

Article 26.- Shelters

The Shelters program is hereby created, which shall be under the coordination and supervision of the Salvadoran Institute for Women's Development, whose services may be provided, in addition to the State and

the municipalities, by non-governmental organizations for the protection of women and civil society, duly accredited by said Institute, which shall have as their objective:
a) To assist women and their affected family group who are at risk and unprotected due to situations of violence, referred by the Governmental and non-governmental Institutions empowered by this Law.
b) To ensure immediate support, physical and emotional integrity and psychosocial care.
Second Section
Other Educational Institutions Article 27.- Other Institutions
State Institutions directly responsible for the detection, prevention, care, protection and punishment of violence against women, shall comprehensively train their personnel in knowledge about women's right to a life free of violence and discrimination, as well as on the dissemination of measures aimed at the prevention and eradication of any form of violence, fostering for this purpose relations of respect, equality and promotion of their human rights.
Within these institutions are included:
1. National Public Security Academy.
2. National Council of the Judiciary.
3. Attorney General's Office of the Republic.
4. Institute of Legal Medicine.
5. Attorney General's Office of the Republic.
6. Office of the Ombudsman for Human Rights.
7. Executive Technical Unit of the Justice Sector.
8. Ministry of Public Health and Social Assistance.
9. Supreme Court of Justice.
10. Penitentiary School.
11. Legislative Assembly.
12. Ministry of Education.

13. Municipal Training Centers.
14. Military School.
15. Other institutions that carry out specialized, non-formal higher education processes.
Said institutions shall guarantee that the training of their training personnel is systematic and specialized in the sensitization, prevention and care of women who face acts of violence. Said trainers must know and transmit the gender approach, emphasizing the structural causes of violence against women, the causes of inequality in power relations between men and women, and theories of construction of masculine identities.

Article 28.- Responsibilities of Collegiate Institutions

The Salvadoran Institute for Women's Development shall promote training programs with the purpose of promoting specialized training, sensitization and research in professional associations, scientific development entities, universities and non-governmental organizations; especially in the social, legal and health areas. Likewise, it shall ensure that collectives, facilitators and researchers develop the processes effectively and by persons who, by their trajectory, guarantee knowledge and values consistent with the objectives of this Law.

Chapter V

Municipal Councils Article 29.- Municipal Councils
The Municipal Councils, for the application of this Law, in accordance with the powers and attributions conferred by the Municipal Code, shall develop actions consistent with this Law and with the National Policy, such as:
1) To prepare every three years, the Municipal Plan for the Prevention and Care of Violence against Women, which must comply with the provisions of the National Policy for Women's Access to a Life Free of Violence.
2) To convene and articulate local institutions and organizations, to generate coordination actions, information exchange and collaboration for the fulfillment of their Municipal Plan.
3) To establish within their budget an earmarked item for the execution of their Municipal Plan and render an annual report on it, to the citizens of their municipalities and to the Salvadoran Institute for Women's Development.
4) To send to the Ministry of Justice and Public Security, the data and statistics on cases of violence against women of which they have knowledge.

The Municipal Councils may not mediate or conciliate any type or modality of violence against women.

Chapter VI

National System of Data, Statistics and Information on Violence Against Women Article 30.- National System of Data and Statistics
The Ministry of Justice and Public Security shall be responsible for managing the National System of Data, Statistics and Information on violence against women, hereinafter National System of Data and Statistics; which must coordinate with the General Directorate of Statistics and Censuses. Said Directorate shall be in charge of requesting and receiving information from the rest of the institutions that possess and process data, statistics or information on acts of violence against women.
The reports of said System must contain:
1. System of indicators.
2. Evaluation of the impact of policies developed for the eradication of any type of violence against women, and of the actions implemented, to guarantee comprehensive care to those who have faced it.
3. Data according to geographic location of occurrence of the act or acts; as well as, the territorial origin, age, occupation, family status and level of schooling of the women who have faced acts of violence and of the aggressor.
4. Data on the acts attended to, such as types, spheres and modalities of violence against women, frequency, types of weapons or means used to execute the violence, measures granted and the history of the judicial process.
5. Effects caused by violence against women.
6. Data relating to the number of women who have faced acts of violence attended to in hospital, educational centers and services, work centers and recurrence from the different sectors of the economy.
7. Referrals made to other instances.
8. Resources expended for the care of women who have faced acts of violence.
9. Others considered necessary.
The Ministry of Justice and Public Security must annually publish the results of the systematization of data on acts of violence against women, through the presentation of reports in printed and electronic media, which must be available upon request of any natural or legal person who so requires.

Article 31

Purpose and Composition of the National System of Data, Statistics and Information on Violence Against Women
The purpose of the National System of Data and Statistics shall be to guarantee the national database of acts of violence against women, for which it must compile and standardize the statistical data and information provided, for which purpose the Ministry of Justice and Public Security in coordination with the General Directorate of Statistics and Censuses, shall have the obligation to request the pertinent information from the corresponding Institutions; as well as, to render monthly the information requested.

Article 32.- Report on Indicators of Violence Against Women

The Institute of Legal Medicine shall annually present diagnostic indicators based on the expert assessments conducted, which must include:
a)	The prevalence of cases of Feminicide.
b)	The effects of physical, psychological and sexual violence on women who face acts of violence.
c)	The effects of exposure to violence and of the aggressions suffered by the sons, daughters, girls, boys or adolescents, in the care of the woman who faces acts of violence.
d)	Assessment of the incidence, objective dangerousness and risk of recidivism of the aggressor.

Article 33.- Budget

Chapter VII Budget, Finance and Special Fund

The resources to finance this Law shall be the following:
a)	The allocations from the items of the General Budget of the Nation, which must be allocated each year or those resources earmarked in matters of violence against women in any of its modalities, to each of the public entities empowered by this Law.
b)	Those special funds intended for women victims of violence.
c)	National and international donations.
d)	Regional or international cooperation.
e)	Other sources of national or international financing.

Article 34.- Financing for the Application of this Law

The State through the Ministry of Finance must guarantee for the execution of this Law the allocation of earmarked budget items in the General Budget of the Nation for each year, to each of the public institutions empowered in this Law for its application.

Article 35.- Special Fund for Women Victims of Violence

The funds obtained from the economic sanctions imposed for infractions committed against this law shall enter the General Fund of the Nation; and the Ministry of Finance must transfer them in full to finance those projects referred to in this Law.

Article 36.- Oversight of Funds

The Court of Accounts of the Republic shall be responsible for the subsequent oversight of the correct use of the funds allocated for the execution of this Law.

Chapter VIII Protection of Housing

Article 37.- Social Assistance and Subsidy

Social assistance or subsidies shall be compatible with any of those provided for in the Laws in force with social programs; and shall come from the Special Fund for women victims of violence.

Article 38.- Access to Social Housing for Women

Women subject to this Law shall be considered priority groups in access to protected social housing and programs, under the terms determined by the legislation in force, assessing their circumstances and the context of lack of protection and vulnerability.

Article 39.- Protection of the Use of Rented Housing

In cases and acts of violence against women by their partner, and the latter rents the dwelling, the woman may continue with the use of the same by court order through the corresponding protection measure. The foregoing does not exempt from payment of the rental fees, to which the aggressor must be ordered to pay.
Said measure shall be notified to the aggressor and to the tenant, so that the woman may use the dwelling for a maximum period of ninety days from the date the corresponding judicial resolution was notified, accompanied by the copy of said judicial resolution or of the part thereof, that affects the use of the dwelling to the landlord.

Article 40.- Access to Housing

The Ministry of Public Works, through the Vice Ministry of Housing and Urban Development, the Social Fund for Housing (FSV), and the National Fund for Popular Housing (FONAVIPO), must

develop a Housing Policy that progressively incorporates a specific housing reserve for women who face acts of violence, and who are in total lack of protection and high-risk conditions. Priority being given to elderly women and women with disabilities.

Article 41.- Supervised Housing

Supervised housing consists of temporary housing spaces under the figure of housing in public protection for women who are in cycles of violence and who have established such situation.
The temporary housing spaces shall be guaranteed by the State; for which purpose, it must issue a Regulation that regulates the procedure so that women who establish the situation of violence may have access to supervised housing.

Article 42.- Certification of Complaint

The Institutions obligated by this Law shall guarantee to women who face acts of violence, the right to obtain the certification of complaint, which must be issued within the term established by Law.
The official who fails to comply with this obligation shall incur a sanction equivalent to ten minimum wages established for workers in commerce and services in force, without prejudice to the corresponding criminal liability.

Article 43.- Establishment of the Situation of Violence

In cases where so required, or where the establishment of the situation of violence against women is required for the recognition of their rights, this shall be accredited, without prejudice to what is established for each case, through:
1.	Certification of judicial resolution for any type and modality of violence.
2.	Certification that accredits specialized care, by a competent public body in matters of violence.

Title II Offenses and Sanctions

Chapter I Offenses and Sanctions

Article 44.- Offenses of Public Action

All offenses contemplated in this chapter are of public action.

Article 45.- Feminicide

Whoever causes the death of a woman with motives of hatred or contempt for her condition as a woman, shall be sanctioned with a prison sentence of twenty to thirty-five years.
It is considered that there is hatred or contempt for the condition of woman when any of the following circumstances occur:
a)	That the death was preceded by any incident of violence committed by the perpetrator against the woman, regardless of whether the act was reported or not by the victim.
b)	That the perpetrator took advantage of any condition of risk or physical or psychological vulnerability in which the woman victim found herself.
c)	That the perpetrator took advantage of the superiority generated by unequal power relations based on gender.
d)	That prior to the death of the woman the perpetrator committed against her any conduct qualified as an offense against sexual freedom.
e)	Death preceded by cause of mutilation.

Article 46.- Aggravated Feminicide

The offense of feminicide shall be sanctioned with a sentence of thirty to fifty years in prison, in the following cases:
a)	If it were carried out by a public or municipal official or employee, public authority or agent of authority.
b)	If it were carried out by two or more persons.
c)	If it were committed in front of any relative of the victim.
d)	When the victim is under eighteen years of age, an elderly adult or suffers physical or mental disability.
e)	If the perpetrator took advantage of the superiority originating from relations of trust, friendship, domestic, educational or work.

Article 47.- Obstruction of Access to Justice

Whoever in the exercise of a public function promotes, encourages or tolerates, impunity or obstructs the investigation, prosecution and sanction of the offenses established in this Law, shall be sanctioned with a prison sentence of two to four years and disqualification from the public function performed for the same period.

Article 48.- Feminicidal Suicide by Inducement or Assistance

Whoever induces a woman to suicide or provides her with assistance to commit it, taking advantage of any of the following circumstances, shall be punished with imprisonment of five to seven years:
a)	That any of the types or modalities of violence contemplated in this Law or in any other Law precedes it.
b)	That the accused has taken advantage of any situation of risk or physical or psychological condition in which the victim found herself, due to any of the types or modalities of violence contemplated in this Law or in any other Law having been exercised against her.
c)	That the inducer has taken advantage of the superiority generated by preexisting or existing relationships between him and the victim.

Article 49

Inducement, Promotion and Favoring of Sexual or Erotic Acts by Computer or Electronic Means
Whoever individually, collectively or in an organized manner publishes, distributes, sends, promotes, facilitates, administers, finances or organizes, in any way the use of women over eighteen years of age, without their consent in sexual or erotic acts, using computer or electronic means, shall be punished with imprisonment of five to ten years.

Article 50.- Illegal Dissemination of Information

Whoever publishes, shares, sends or distributes personal information that damages the honor, personal and family privacy, and the image of a woman without her consent, shall be punished with a penalty of one to three years.

Article 51.- Dissemination of Pornography

Whoever publishes, shares, sends or distributes pornographic material by any computer or electronic means in which the image or identity of a woman is used without her consent, shall be punished with a penalty of three to five years.

Article 52.- Favoring Non-Compliance with Economic Support Duties

Whoever being obligated to report on the income of those who must comply with economic support duties, conceals or gives false or late information, or fails to comply with an order of judicial or administrative authority, shall be punished with imprisonment of one to three years, and a fine equivalent to thirty minimum wages in commerce and services.

Article 53.- Patrimonial Misappropriation

Whoever misappropriates any property or asset from the possession or patrimony of a woman with whom he maintains a relationship of kinship, marriage or cohabitation without her consent, shall be punished with imprisonment

of two to four years.

Article 54.- Misappropriation of the profits of family economic activities

Whoever misappropriates the profits or income derived from a family economic activity, or disposes of them for his personal benefit and to the detriment of the rights of a woman with whom he maintains a relationship of kinship, marriage or cohabitation whether declared or not, shall be punished with imprisonment of three to six years.

Article 55.- Expressions of violence against women

Whoever performs any of the following conducts, shall be punished with a fine of two to twenty-five minimum wages in commerce and services:
a)	Prepare, publish, disseminate or transmit by any means, images or visual, audiovisual, multimedia messages or computer platforms with content of hatred or contempt towards women.
b)	Use verbal or non-verbal expressions relating to the exercise of parental authority that are intended to intimidate women.
c)	Mock, discredit, degrade or isolate women within their work, educational, community environments, spaces of political or civic participation, institutional or other similar spaces as a form of expression of discrimination in accordance with this Law.
d)	Prevent, limit or obstruct the participation of women in any process of academic training, political participation, labor insertion or health care.
e)	Expose women to an imminent risk to their physical or emotional integrity.
f)	Display or share pornography of persons of legal age in public, work and community spaces.

Chapter II Specific Procedural Provisions

Article 56.- Criminal Prosecution Policy on Violence Against Women

The Office of the Attorney General of the Republic must create the criminal prosecution policy on Violence against Women in accordance with the principles established in this Law.

Article 56-A.- SPECIALIZED JURISDICTION AND MULTIDISCIPLINARY TEAMS (1)

FOR THE APPLICATION OF THE CRIMINAL OFFENSES CONTAINED IN THIS REGULATION, A SENSITIZED AND SPECIALIZED JURISDICTION IN GENDER MATTERS MUST BE CREATED, FOLLOWING THE SAME STRUCTURE, DEGREES OF JURISDICTION AND INSTANCES AS IN COMMON CRIMINAL PROCEEDINGS BUT ATTENDING TO THE PARTICULARITIES ORDERED IN THIS LAW AND THE

APPLICABLE AND RATIFIED INTERNATIONAL HUMAN RIGHTS INSTRUMENTS, THIS JURISDICTION MUST BE SUPPORTED BY EQUALLY SPECIALIZED MULTIDISCIPLINARY TEAMS.
WHILE THIS JURISDICTION IS NOT CREATED AND COMPLETED, THE COMPETENT COURTS IN CRIMINAL MATTERS SHALL CONTINUE TO HAVE JURISDICTION. (

1) Article 57.- Procedural Guarantees for Women Facing Acts of Violence

Women facing acts of violence shall be guaranteed:
a)	That their intimacy and privacy be preserved at all times. Consequently, their sexual life may not be exposed directly or indirectly, to justify, minimize or relativize the harm caused.
b)	That they be provided with a copy of the prosecutorial request, the administrative complaint, the legal medical examination and any other document of interest to the woman facing acts of violence; as well as, to be treated with dignity and respect, especially by the parties involved in the process.
c)	To be attended to the extent possible, by persons of the same sex who are expert and trained in victims' rights, women's human rights, gender perspective and prevention of gender-based violence, in accessible places that guarantee privacy, security and comfort.
d)	Not to be discriminated against on the basis of their sexual history or for any other reason.
e)	That their privacy be duly protected and total or partial confidentiality of the file be applied, to avoid the disclosure of information that could lead to their identification or that of their family members, maintaining the confidentiality of information about their residence, telephone, place of work or study, among other aspects. Such protection includes their family and close associates.
f)	TO BE INFORMED AND NOTIFIED IN A TIMELY AND TRUTHFUL MANNER, OF THE ACTIONS BEING CARRIED OUT THROUGHOUT THE ENTIRE JUDICIAL OR ADMINISTRATIVE PROCESS, AS WELL AS OF THE PERTINENT REMEDIES AND ASSISTANCE SERVICES. (1)
g)	To receive comprehensive, adequate and timely assistance, which may exceed the duration of the administrative or judicial process, regardless of the outcome.
h)	To receive medical attention, adequate and specialized treatment, in cases that warrant it. As well as the use of the Protocol for attention in case of sexual violence, to prevent Sexually Transmitted Infections and the Technical Guide for Attention in Family Planning.
i)	To designate a companion throughout the entire judicial or administrative process.
j)	Not to be coerced for statements made during the process.

k)	That emergency, protection or precautionary measures established in this or other Laws in force be decreed immediately.
l)	TO RECEIVE TIMELY AND ADEQUATE AID AND PROTECTION FROM THE NATIONAL CIVIL POLICE. (1)
m)	To give testimony under special conditions of protection and care; as well as, to use the figure of advance evidence.
n)	That their emotional state be taken into account when testifying at trial, and that this be done individually.
o)	To receive information about their rights and the process in a language, speech or dialect that they understand, in a manner accessible to their age and maturity.
p)	To request emergency, protection and precautionary measures in the event that early release is granted to the aggressor.
Victims of the crime of trafficking in addition to the guarantees already established, shall enjoy the following:
1.	That the sanctions or impediments established in immigration legislation not be applied to them, when the infractions are a consequence of the activity deployed during the commission of the crime of which they have been victims.
2.	To remain in the country, in accordance with current legislation, and to receive the documentation or certificate that accredits such circumstance.
3.	Free immigration legal advice.
Women facing acts of violence shall enjoy all the rights established in this Law, in the rest of the legal system and in the International Conventions in force.

Article 58.- Prohibition of Conciliation and Mediation

Conciliation or Mediation of any of the crimes included in this Law is prohibited.
Final Provisions

Article 59.- Declaration of Public and National Interest

The implementation of this Law is declared to be of public and national interest.

Article 60.- Supplementary Rule

In matters not provided for in this Law, the common procedural rules shall apply insofar as

they are compatible with the nature thereof; as well as, the provisions contained in the Criminal Procedure Code.

Article 61.- Effective Date of the Law

This Law shall enter into force on the first of January two thousand twelve, upon publication in the Official Gazette.
GIVEN IN THE BLUE HALL OF THE LEGISLATIVE PALACE: San Salvador, on the twenty-fifth day of the month of November of the year two thousand ten.

CIRO CRUZ ZEPEDA PEÑA, PRESIDENT.
OTHON SIGFRIDO REYES MORALES,	GUILLERMO ANTONIO GALLEGOS NAVARRETE, FIRST VICE PRESIDENT.		SECOND VICE PRESIDENT.
JOSÉ FRANCISCO MERINO LÓPEZ,	ALBERTO ARMANDO ROMERO RODRÍGUEZ, THIRD VICE PRESIDENT.		FOURTH VICE PRESIDENT.
FRANCISCO ROBERTO LORENZANA DURAN, FIFTH VICE PRESIDENT.
LORENA GUADALUPE PEÑA MENDOZA,	CESAR HUMBERTO GARCÍA AGUILERA, FIRST SECRETARY.		SECOND SECRETARY.
ELIZARDO GONZÁLEZ LOVO,	ROBERTO JOSÉ d'AUBUISSON MUNGUÍA, THIRD SECRETARY.		FOURTH SECRETARY.
IRMA LOURDES PALACIOS VÁSQUEZ,
FIFTH SECRETARY.	SIXTH SECRETARY.
MARIO ALBERTO TENORIO GUERRERO, SEVENTH SECRETARY.
PRESIDENTIAL HOUSE: San Salvador, on the fourteenth day of the month of December of the year two thousand

ten.

PUBLISH,

Carlos Mauricio Funes Cartagena, President of the Republic.

Humberto Centeno Najarro,

D. O. No. 2	Minister of Government.
Volume No. 390
Date:	January 4, 2011

SV/adar 1-2-2011

AMENDMENT:
(1)	D. L. No. 545, NOVEMBER 24, 2016,
D. O. No. 232,
V. 413, DECEMBER 13, 2016.

RELATED PROVISION:
CREATION OF SPECIALIZED COURTS AND TRIBUNALS FOR A LIFE FREE OF VIOLENCE AND DISCRIMINATION FOR WOMEN.
D. L. No. 286, FEBRUARY 25, 2016,
D. O. No. 60,
V. 411, APRIL 4, 2016. (EXPIRES: 1/06/2016)
EXTENSIONS TO D. L. No. 286/16:
D. L. No. 397, JUNE 2, 2016,
D. O. No. 112,
V. 411, JUNE 16, 2016. (EXPIRES: 31/12/16)
D. L. No. 575, DECEMBER 20, 2016,
D. O. No. 240,
V. 413, DECEMBER 23, 2016. (EXPIRES: 30/06/17)
D. L. No. 722, JUNE 29, 2017,
D. O. No. 121,
V. 415, JUNE 30, 2017. (EXPIRES: 30/09/17)
EXTENSION TO D. L. No. 722/17:
D. L. No. 792, SEPTEMBER 28, 2017;
D. O. No. 181,
V. 416, SEPTEMBER 29, 2017. (EXPIRES: 31/12/17)

JQ 22/04/16
JQ 08/07/16
GM 16/01/17
GM 06/02/17
VD 25/07/17

GM 17/10/17

This excerpt sits under: DECREE No. 520 > Title II Crimes and Sanctions > Chapter II Specific Procedural Provisions
