PROTECTION AGAINST FAMILY VIOLENCE

PROTECTION AGAINST FAMILY VIOLENCE
Law No. 24,417
Enacted: December 7, 1994
Promulgated: December 28, 1994
The Senate and Chamber of Deputies of the Argentine Nation assembled in Congress, etc., enact with force of Law:

ARTICLE 1

Any person who suffers injuries or physical or psychological mistreatment by any member of the family group may report these acts verbally or in writing before the judge with jurisdiction in family matters and request related precautionary measures. For the purposes of this law, family group means that originating from marriage or de facto unions.

ARTICLE 2

When the injured parties are minors or incapacitated persons, elderly or disabled, the acts must be reported by their legal representatives and/or the public prosecutor. Social or educational assistance services, public or private, health professionals and all public officials by reason of their work shall also be obligated to file the report. The minor or incapacitated person may directly bring the acts to the attention of the public prosecutor.

ARTICLE 3

The judge shall require a diagnosis of family interaction carried out by experts from various disciplines to determine the physical and psychological damages suffered by the victim, the danger situation and the social and environmental context of the family. The parties may request other technical reports.

ARTICLE 4

The judge may adopt, upon becoming aware of the facts that are the subject of the report, the following precautionary measures:
a) Order the exclusion of the perpetrator from the dwelling where the family group resides;
b) Prohibit the perpetrator's access to the injured party's domicile as well as to places of work or study;
c) Order the return to the domicile at the request of the person who had to leave it for reasons of personal safety, excluding the perpetrator;
d) Provisionally decree alimony, custody and right of communication with the children.
The judge shall establish the duration of the measures ordered according to the background of the case.

ARTICLE 5

The judge, within 48 hours of adopting the precautionary measures, shall summon the parties and the public prosecutor to a mediation hearing urging them and their family group to attend educational or therapeutic programs, taking into account the report of article 3.

ARTICLE 6

The regulation of this law shall provide for measures aimed at providing the accused and his family group with free psychological medical assistance.

ARTICLE 7

The reports that are filed shall be brought to the attention of the National Council for Minors and the Family in order to coordinate public and private services that prevent and, where appropriate, overcome the causes of mistreatment, abuse and all types of violence within the family.
For the same purpose, public agencies and non-governmental entities dedicated to the prevention of violence and assistance to victims may be summoned by the judge.

ARTICLE 8

The following is incorporated as a second paragraph to article 310 of the Criminal Procedure Code of the Nation (Law 23,984):
In proceedings for any of the crimes provided for in book two, titles I, II, III, V and VI, and title V chapter I of the Criminal Code committed within a cohabiting family group, even if constituted by de facto unions, and the circumstances of the case give rise to a well-founded presumption that it may be repeated, the judge may order as a precautionary measure the exclusion from the home of the accused. If the accused has family support obligations and the exclusion would endanger the subsistence of the dependents, the minors' counsel shall be given intervention so that the appropriate actions may be brought.

ARTICLE 9

The provinces are invited to enact rules of the same nature as those provided for herein.

ARTICLE 10

Communicate to the National Executive Power. - ALBERTO R. PIERRI. - EDUARDO MENEM. - Esther H. Pereyra Arandía de Pérez Pardo. - Edgardo Piuzzi.
GIVEN IN THE SESSION HALL OF THE ARGENTINE CONGRESS, IN BUENOS AIRES, ON THE SEVENTH DAY OF THE MONTH OF DECEMBER OF THE YEAR ONE THOUSAND NINE HUNDRED NINETY-FOUR.
