Attention! The version you are currently viewing does not represent the final version of the document. To view the final version of the document, select the appropriate consolidated v

Attention! The version you are currently viewing does not represent the final version of the document. To view the final version of the document, select the appropriate consolidated version.

Consolidated version (30/12/2021 - 22/12/2022)

Translation into Abkhazian, Ossetian, Azerbaijani and Armenian languages (4)

On the Prevention of Violence against Women and/or Domestic Violence, Protection and Assistance of Victims of Violence

Law of Georgia of 4 May 2017 №761 - website, 25.05.2017

Chapter I. General Provisions

Article 1. Scope of the Law

1. This Law defines the set of acts characteristic of violence against women and/or domestic violence in public or private life, the legal and organizational grounds for detecting and preventing violence, as well as guarantees of social and legal protection and assistance to victims.

2. This Law, taking into account the specificities established by this Law, also applies to those relationships that violate the constitutional rights and freedoms of a minor through neglect and/or physical, psychological, economic, sexual violence or coercion.

Law of Georgia of 22 June 2016 № 5446 - website, 12.07.2016

Law of Georgia of 4 May 2017 №761 - website, 25.05.2017

Article 2. Purpose of the Law

The purpose of this Law is:

a) to ensure the creation of legislative guarantees for the protection of the rights and freedoms of family members, physical and psychological integrity, and the protection of family values through the recognition of equal rights of family members;

a1) to ensure the creation of legislative guarantees for the protection of women's rights and freedoms, physical, psychological, sexual and economic integrity;

b) to create effective legislative mechanisms for detecting, preventing and averting violence against women and/or domestic violence;

c) to create a system for ensuring victims' access to justice;

d) to create the foundations for the protection, assistance and rehabilitation of victims;

e) to ensure cooperation between various institutions for the prevention of violence against women and/or domestic violence and for combating violence;

f) to ensure the promotion of the implementation of measures aimed at correcting the attitudes and behaviour of perpetrators.

Law of Georgia of 28 December 2009 №2507-SSMI, №3, 13.01.2010, Art. 4

Law of Georgia of 4 May 2017 №761 - website, 25.05.2017

Article 3. Domestic Violence

Domestic violence means the violation of the constitutional rights and freedoms of one family member by another through neglect and/or physical, psychological, economic, sexual violence or coercion.

Law of Georgia of 17 October 2014 №2697 - website, 31.10.2014

Article 3

[1]. Violence against Women

1. Violence against women means all acts characteristic of violence committed on the basis of gender against women in public or private life, which result or may result in physical, psychological or sexual suffering or economic harm to women, including threats of such acts, coercion of women or arbitrary deprivation of their liberty.

2. For the purposes of this Law, a woman also means a female minor under 18 years of age.

Law of Georgia of 4 May 2017 №761 - website, 25.05.2017

Article 4. Definition of Terms Used in the Law

The terms used in this Law have the following meanings:

a) physical violence – beating, torture, injury to health, unlawful deprivation of liberty or other action that causes physical pain or suffering; failure to satisfy health-related needs, which causes injury to the victim's health or death;

b) psychological violence – insult, blackmail, humiliation, threat or other action that causes violation of a person's honor and dignity;

c) coercion – physical or psychological coercion of a person to perform or not perform an action, the performance of which or refraining from which is his/her right, or to experience against his/her own will an influence upon himself/herself;

d) sexual violence – sexual intercourse by violence, threat of violence or exploitation of the victim's helplessness; sexual intercourse or other action of a sexual nature or depraved act against a minor;

e) economic violence – action that causes restriction of provision with food, housing and other conditions for normal development, exercise of property and labor rights, as well as the right to use jointly owned property and dispose of the due share;

e1) neglect of the legitimate interests of a minor – failure by a parent (parents), other legal representative or/and other responsible person to satisfy the physical and psychological needs of a minor, failure to protect from danger, restriction of the right to basic education, failure to perform actions necessary for birth registration, medical and other services, if the parent (parents), other legal representative or/and other responsible person has (have) appropriate information and opportunity and has (have) access to the relevant service;

v) victim – a woman, as well as any family member whose constitutional rights and freedoms have been violated by neglect or/and physical, psychological, economic or sexual violence or coercion and who has been granted victim status by the relevant service of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia, a court body or/and the group for determining the status of a victim of violence against women or/and domestic violence under the Inter-Agency Commission on Gender Equality, Violence Against Women and Domestic Violence (hereinafter – the Victim Identification Group). A victim is also considered to be a minor whose legitimate interests have been neglected and who has been granted victim status by the relevant service of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia, a court body or/and the Victim Identification Group. For the purposes of Article 14, paragraphs 1 and 2 and the second sentence of paragraph 3, Article 14², subparagraph "i" of paragraph 3 and paragraph 6 of Article 16 of this Law, a victim is also considered to be a minor who, on the basis of a legal act or civil law transaction or without them, is actually staying/living with another responsible person or any other person who has violated his/her constitutional rights and freedoms by neglect or/and physical, psychological, sexual or economic violence or coercion, and whom a social worker has separated from the abuser. A victim is also considered to be a child who is a witness to violence;

v1) alleged victim – a person who believes that he/she is a victim and who applies to the relevant service/body/Victim Identification Group for the purpose of determining victim status;

z) family member – for the purposes of this Law, mother, father, grandfather, grandmother, spouse, person in an unregistered marriage, child (adopted child), foster child, foster parent (stepmother, stepfather), stepmother, stepfather, grandchild, sister, brother, spouse's parent, parent of person in unregistered marriage, child's spouse (including person in unregistered marriage), former spouse, person previously in unregistered marriage, guardian, curator, supporter, person under guardianship and curatorship, recipient of support, as well as persons who permanently engage or engaged in a common household;

z1) other responsible person – a person (except for persons provided for by subparagraph "z" of this article) with whom a minor is actually staying/living on the basis of a legal act or civil law transaction, and who has been assigned the obligation to care for and protect the legitimate interests of that minor on the basis of the same legal act or civil law transaction;

z2) social worker – a social worker defined by the child protection referral procedures; t) abuser – a family member who violates the constitutional rights and freedoms of another family member by neglect or/and physical, psychological, sexual or economic violence or coercion. An abuser is also considered to be a family member or any other person who, in public or private life, exercises physical, psychological, sexual or economic violence or coercion against a woman on the basis of gender. For the purposes of Article 14, paragraphs 1 and 2 and the second sentence of paragraph 3, Article 14², subparagraph "i" of paragraph 3 and paragraph 6 of Article 16 of this Law, an abuser is also considered to be another responsible person or any other person who violates the constitutional rights and freedoms of a minor actually staying/living with him/her on the basis of a legal act or civil law transaction or without them, by neglect or/and physical, psychological, sexual or economic violence or economic

i) shelter – temporary housing for victims or a temporary placement site for victims existing in the system of the Ministry of Internally Displaced Persons from the Occupied Territories of Georgia, Labour, Health and Social Affairs or/and on the basis of a non-entrepreneurial (non-commercial) legal person, which serves the psychological-social rehabilitation, legal and medical assistance and protection of victims;

k) measures aimed at correcting the abuser's attitudes and behavior – a mandatory training course oriented toward changing violent attitudes and behavior;

l) crisis center – a temporary placement site for alleged victims and victims, which serves their psychological-social rehabilitation, primary and emergency medical care and legal assistance. Placement of a person and persons dependent on him/her in a crisis center is possible before determining victim status and after determining this status, if the victim does not express a desire to be placed in a shelter for housing and needs only psychological-social rehabilitation, primary and emergency medical care and legal assistance without living in a shelter;

m) (deleted - 04.05.2017, №761).

Law of Georgia of 28 December 2009 №2507-ssm, №3, 13.01.2010, Art.4
Law of Georgia of 17 October 2014 №2697 - website, 31.10.2014.
Law of Georgia of 22 June 2016 №5446 - website, 12.07.2016.
Law of Georgia of 4 May 2017 №752 - website, 24.05.2017.
Law of Georgia of 4 May 2017 №761 - website, 25.05.2017.

Law of Georgia of 5 July 2018 №3105 – website, 11.07.2018. Law of Georgia of 13 July 2020 №6758 – website, 20.07.2020.

Article 5

Legislation of Georgia on Prevention of Violence Against Women or/and Domestic Violence, Protection and Assistance of Victims

The legislation of Georgia on prevention of violence against women or/and domestic violence, protection and assistance of victims is based on the Constitution of Georgia, international treaties of Georgia, this Law and other normative acts of Georgia.

Law of Georgia of 4 May 2017 №761 - website, 25.05.2017.

Chapter II. Prevention of Violence Against Women or/and Domestic Violence

Law of Georgia of 4 May 2017 №761 - website, 25.05.2017.

Article 6. Mechanisms for the Prevention of Violence against Women and/or Domestic Violence

1. Mechanisms for the prevention of violence against women and/or domestic violence mean the totality of social, economic, legal and other measures aimed at preventing the causes and preconditions of violence against women and/or domestic violence, preventing violence, legal prosecution of the perpetrator, correction of his/her attitudes and behavior, rehabilitation and adaptation of the victim.

2. The state, through its authorized bodies, promotes and ensures mechanisms for the prevention of violence against women and/or domestic violence.

3. Mechanisms for the prevention of violence against women and/or domestic violence include:

ა) analysis, study and assessment of factors that are causes of violence against women and/or domestic violence;

ბ) introduction of effective legal methods for detecting and preventing violence against women and/or domestic violence;

გ) production of relevant statistics;

დ) implementation of preventive measures towards persons who belong to risk groups for committing violence against women and/or domestic violence or who have committed violence against women and/or domestic violence;

ე) conducting an appropriate information-educational campaign so that people have information about their rights and freedoms, obligations, as well as relevant protection guarantees, including those rights and obligations that ensure equality and mutual obligations of family members;

ვ) dissemination and accessibility of information about the perpetrator's responsibility, the victim's rights and guarantees for the protection of these rights in cases of violence against women and/or domestic violence;

ზ) implementation of assistance and protection measures for the victim in cases of violence against women and/or domestic violence, and for the perpetrator – measures aimed at correction of attitudes and behavior;

თ) creation and support of joint programs with interested institutions to ensure the prevention of violence against women and/or domestic violence.

Law of Georgia No. 2507-ssm of 28 December 2009, No. 3, 13.01.2010, Art. 4

Law of Georgia No. 761 of 4 May 2017 - website, 25.05.2017

Article 7

Implementation of Measures for the Prevention of Violence against Women and/or Domestic Violence

1. Implementation of measures for the prevention of violence against women and/or domestic violence, within their competence, in the manner established by this Law, is ensured by the Ministry of Internally Displaced Persons from the Occupied Territories, Labour, Health and Social Affairs of Georgia, the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia, the Ministry of Education and Science of Georgia, the bodies of the Prosecutor's Office of Georgia and judicial bodies.

2. When implementing measures for the prevention of violence against women and/or domestic violence, relevant state bodies may cooperate with interested institutions working on issues of violence against women and/or domestic violence and human rights protection and ensure the planning and implementation of joint projects.

3. The Interagency Commission on Gender Equality, Violence against Women and Domestic Violence, within the limits established by the legislation of Georgia, ensures the implementation of monitoring and evaluation measures aimed at the prevention and suppression of all forms of violence falling within the scope of regulation of this Law.

4. Primary identification, detection of victims of violence against women and/or domestic violence, their protection, assistance, rehabilitation and for this purpose timely, coordinated (mutually agreed) activities of state bodies and other relevant subjects are determined by the "National Referral Procedures for Identifying Victims of Violence against Women and/or Domestic Violence, Their Protection, Assistance and Rehabilitation", which are approved by the Government of Georgia.

5. The state ensures the inclusion of components aimed at the prevention of violence against women and/or domestic violence in the educational programs of general educational institutions (schools), vocational and higher educational institutions.

Law of Georgia No. 4744 of 19 February 2016 - website, 25.02.2016

Law of Georgia No. 761 of 4 May 2017 - website, 25.05.2017

Law of Georgia No. 1820 of 22 December 2017 – website, 11.01.2018

30/04/2026, 10:35  On the Prevention of Violence against Women and/or Domestic Violence, Protection and Assistance of Victims of Violence | ...  Law of Georgia No. 3105 of 5 July 2018 – website, 11.07.2018  Law of Georgia No. 5024 of 20 September 2019 – website, 01.10.2019  Law of Georgia No. 367 of 16 March 2021 – website, 18.03.2021

Article 8. Social Services

1. The Ministry of Internally Displaced Persons from the Occupied Territories, Labour, Health and Social Affairs of Georgia, within its competence, ensures social services for the implementation of measures for the prevention of violence against women and/or domestic violence.

2. Social services include:

ა) study of the causes of family disputes, relevant analysis and assistance to family members in overcoming disputes;

ბ) implementation of measures for support and assistance to victims;

გ) identification of risk groups of perpetrators together with relevant state bodies and assistance in solving problems related to them;

დ) participation in the process of issuing a protective order;

ე) participation in the process of monitoring the enforcement of issues provided for by protective and restraining orders;

ვ) development of assistance and social rehabilitation programs for victims and facilitation of their implementation.

Law of Georgia No. 2507-ssmI of 28 December 2009, No. 3, 13.01.2010, Art. 4

Law of Georgia No. 761 of 4 May 2017 - website, 25.05.2017

Law of Georgia No. 3105 of 5 July 2018 – website, 11.07.2018

Chapter III. Mechanisms for Detecting and Preventing Violence against Women and/or Domestic Violence

Law of Georgia No. 761 of 4 May 2017 - website, 25.05.2017

Article 9

Mechanisms for Detecting and Preventing Violence against Women and/or Domestic Violence

1. For detecting and preventing violence against women and/or domestic violence, criminal law, civil law and administrative law mechanisms are used.

2. Criminal law mechanisms are used when a fact of violence against women and/or domestic violence contains signs of a criminal offense.

3. Civil law mechanisms are used to compensate for damage caused as a result of violence against women and/or domestic violence in the manner established by the Civil Code of Georgia.

4. Administrative law mechanisms are used by issuing a restraining order/protective order, as well as when the nature of the offense, in accordance with the legislation of Georgia, does not entail criminal liability and its prevention is possible through the application of the norms of the Code of Administrative Offences of Georgia.

Law of Georgia No. 2507-ssmI of 28 December 2009, No. 3, 13.01.2010, Art. 4

Law of Georgia No. 761 of 4 May 2017 - website, 25.05.2017

This excerpt sits under: Attention! The version you are currently viewing does not represent the last edition of the document. To view the last edition of the document, select the appropriate consolidated v

Article 9

[1]. Detection of cases of violence against women and/or domestic violence

Detection of cases of violence against women and/or domestic violence and ensuring appropriate response thereto shall be carried out by law enforcement bodies and judicial bodies, as well as in accordance with the procedure established by this Law – by the victim identification group. The obligation to contact the relevant bodies for the purpose of initial identification of and response to facts of violence against women and/or domestic violence is imposed on authorized employees of medical institutions, in cases of minors – also educational and upbringing institutions, the guardianship and trusteeship authority, and other subjects provided for by the legislation of Georgia.

Law of Georgia of 17 October 2014 No. 2697 - website, 31.10.2014

Law of Georgia of 4 May 2017 No. 761 - website, 25.05.2017

Law of Georgia of 11 December 2019 No. 5463 – website, 19.12.2019

Article 1

0. Protective and Restraining Orders

1. For operational response to a fact of violence against women and/or domestic violence, the authorized body may issue a restraining order or a protective order as a temporary measure to protect the victim and restrict certain actions of the abuser.

1[1]. The issuance of a restraining order as a temporary measure by an authorized police officer to ensure the protection of the victim and the restriction of certain actions of the abuser is mandatory in cases of initiation or ongoing investigation under Articles 108, 109, 115, 117, 118, 120, 126, 137 and 138, Article 143, Part 3, subparagraph "e" and Part 4, Article 144, Part 2, subparagraph "i" and Part 3, Articles 144[1]–144[3] and 151, Article 160, Part 2, subparagraph "a" and Part 3, and Article 381[1] of the Criminal Code of Georgia.

1 2. After receiving a notification about a fact of violence against women and/or domestic violence provided for in paragraph 1 of this Article, if there are no grounds for initiating an investigation and, accordingly, the procedure established by paragraph 1 1 of this Article is not applied, the authorized police officer shall assess the risk of recurrence of violence against women and/or domestic violence in accordance with the procedure established by the Order of the Minister of Internal Affairs of Georgia and, depending on the severity of this risk, shall make one of the following decisions:

a) on the issuance of a restraining order;

b) on the refusal to issue a restraining order.

2. A protective order is an act issued by a first instance court (judge) through administrative proceedings, which determines temporary measures for the protection of the victim.

3. A restraining order is an act issued by an authorized police officer, which determines temporary measures for the protection of the victim in cases of violence against women and/or domestic violence. A restraining order is issued on the basis of a risk assessment questionnaire defined by the restraining order protocol approved by the Order of the Minister of Internal Affairs of Georgia.

3 1. A restraining order shall indicate:

a) the date and place of its issuance;

b) the circumstances that formed the basis for its issuance;

c) the abuser's name, surname, date and place of birth, personal number, profession and place of residence## Article 1

0. Protective and restraining orders

1. For operational response to a fact of violence against women and/or domestic violence, the authorized body may issue a restraining order or a protective order as a temporary measure to protect the victim and restrict certain actions of the perpetrator.

1[1]. The issuance of a restraining order as a temporary measure by an authorized police officer to ensure the protection of the victim and the restriction of certain actions of the perpetrator is mandatory in cases of commencement or ongoing investigation under Articles 108, 109, 115, 117, 118, 120, 126, 137 and 138, Article 143, Part 3, subparagraph "e" and Part 4, Article 144, Part 2, subparagraph "i" and Part 3, Articles 144[1]–144[3] and 151, Article 160, Part 2, subparagraph "a" and Part 3, and Article 381[1] of the Criminal Code of Georgia.

1 2. After receiving a notification about a fact of violence against women and/or domestic violence provided for in the first paragraph of this article, if there are no grounds for commencing an investigation and, accordingly, the procedure established by paragraph 1 1 of this article is not applied, the authorized police officer shall assess the risk of recurrence of violence against women and/or domestic violence in accordance with the procedure established by the order of the Minister of Internal Affairs of Georgia and, depending on the severity of this risk, shall make one of the following decisions:

a) on the issuance of a restraining order;

b) on the refusal to issue a restraining order.

2. A protective order is an act issued by a first instance court (judge) through administrative proceedings, which determines temporary measures for the protection of the victim.

3. A restraining order is an act issued by an authorized police officer, which determines temporary measures for the protection of the victim in cases of violence against women and/or domestic violence. A restraining order is issued on the basis of a risk assessment questionnaire defined by the restraining order protocol approved by the order of the Minister of Internal Affairs of Georgia.

3 1. A restraining order shall indicate:

a) the date and place of its issuance;

b) the circumstances that formed the basis for its issuance;

c) the perpetrator's name, surname, date and place of birth, personal number, profession and place of residence;

c 1) the victim's name, surname, date of birth and personal number;

d) the list of actions provided for in paragraph 3 2 of this article, the performance of which is prohibited to the perpetrator.

3 2. A restraining order shall be signed by the person authorized to issue it, the victim and the perpetrator. A restraining order may provide for:

a) the issue of removing the perpetrator from the victim's dwelling, regardless of whether the perpetrator is the owner of this dwelling or not;

b) the issues of separating the victim and persons dependent on them from the perpetrator and placing them in a shelter;

c) the prohibition of the perpetrator's right to use jointly owned property individually;

d) the issue of separating the perpetrator from a minor;

e) the issue of the perpetrator's approach to the victim, their workplace and other places where the victim is located;

v) the issue of implementing electronic surveillance;

z) the restriction or prohibition of the perpetrator's right to use weapons (including service weapons) during the period of validity of this order or during the period determined by this order, the prohibition of the right to acquire weapons or to obtain a permit or license for their acquisition, and the conditions for storing or temporarily confiscating weapons in personal possession and/or owned weapons (including service weapons);

t) a warning to the perpetrator about the imposition of liability established by the legislation of Georgia in case of failure to fulfill the requirements and obligations provided for by this order;

i) other issues, the resolution of which is necessary to ensure the safety of the victim.

3 3. If the victim and/or the perpetrator for any reason cannot sign the restraining order, it shall be signed only by the person authorized to issue the restraining order. In this case, an appropriate entry shall be made in the restraining order and the reason for the victim's and/or perpetrator's refusal to sign/inability to sign shall be indicated.

3 4. A restraining order may indicate one, several or all of the issues provided for in paragraph 3 2 of this article, adequate to the fact of violence. A restraining order must indicate the restriction of the right to use weapons defined by subparagraph "v" of paragraph 3 2 of this article in cases of commencement or ongoing investigation under Articles 108, 109, 115, 117, 118, 120, 126, 137 and 138, Article 143, Part 3, subparagraph "e", Article 144, Part 2, subparagraph "i", Articles 144 1–144 3 and 151, Article 160, Part 2, subparagraph "a" and Part 3, and Article 381 1 of the Criminal Code of Georgia.

3 5. A restraining order shall be written in the language of the proceedings, clearly and comprehensibly. It may be written by hand or printed using technical means.

3 6. A restraining order shall enter into force upon issuance. Within 24 hours it shall be sent/delivered to the victim and the perpetrator, and one copy of the restraining order shall remain with the issuing body.

3 7. A copy of the restraining order shall be immediately sent to:

a) the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia:

a.a) the relevant district service of the territorial body according to the victim's place of residence, for the purpose of responding to violations of the requirements and obligations provided for by the restraining order;

a.b) the relevant structural subdivision, for the purpose of entering information into the appropriate electronic database, rapid and effective response to violations, and recording statistical data;

a.c) the public law legal entity – the Service Agency of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia, if the restraining order concerns issues related to weapons;

a.d) the public law legal entity of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia – the Public Safety Management Center "112" (hereinafter – LEPL - "112"), if the restraining order provides for the implementation of electronic surveillance;

b) the relevant local guardianship and trusteeship body, if the issue provided for by the restraining order concerns a minor.

3 . The victim or the perpetrator may appeal the restraining order within 3 days from the date of delivery/receipt of this order.

3 . If, during the consideration of the issue of issuing a restraining order, signs of a crime provided for by the Criminal Code of Georgia are identified, in parallel with the consideration of the issue of issuing a restraining order, the case materials shall be sent to the relevant body according to jurisdiction to decide the issue of criminal prosecution;

3 10. In case of establishing electronic surveillance of the perpetrator, the parameters of the geographical zones where the approach provided for by subparagraph "e" of paragraph 3 2 of this article is prohibited shall be determined by the order of the Minister of Internal Affairs of Georgia.

4. Failure by the perpetrator to fulfill the requirements provided for by a restraining or protective order, as well as disobedience to a decision made by a social worker on the separation of a minor, shall entail liability in accordance with the procedure established by the legislation of Georgia.

5. The application of measures (criminal mechanisms) provided for by the criminal legislation of Georgia against a person who has committed violence against women and/or domestic violence (perpetrator) does not prevent the issuance of a protective order or a restraining order to ensure the protection of the person injured as a result of violence (victim).

6. If criminal prosecution has been initiated against a person who has committed violence against women and/or domestic violence (perpetrator) on charges of violence against women and/or domestic violence and/or domestic crime and a non-custodial preventive measure has been applied, the authorized court shall consider and decide the issue of applying restrictive measures against the perpetrator to ensure the protection of the person injured as a result of violence (victim) through criminal proceedings.

7. A restraining order must provide for the perpetrator's completion of a mandatory training course oriented towards changing violent attitudes and behavior.

Georgia's Law of December 28, 2009 No. 2507-ssm, No. 3, 13.01.2010, Art. 4  Georgia's Law of October 17, 2014 No. 2697 - website, 31.10.2014  Georgia's Law of June 22, 2016 No. 5446 - website, 12.07.2016  Georgia's Law of May 4, 2017 No. 761 - website, 25.05.2017  Georgia's Law of May 30, 2018 No. 2394 – website, 08.06.2018  Georgia's Law of September 20, 2019 No. 5024 – website, 01.10.2019  Georgia's Law of July 13, 2020 No. 6758 – website, 20.07.2020

Article 1

0 1. Establishment and Implementation of Electronic Monitoring of the Perpetrator

1. In the event of violence against women and/or domestic violence, an authorized police officer may establish electronic monitoring of the perpetrator to ensure the implementation of the temporary protective measure for victim protection provided for in subparagraph "e" of paragraph 3 2 of Article 10 of this Law.

2. The establishment of electronic monitoring of the perpetrator is permissible to ensure the implementation of the temporary protective measure for victim protection provided for in subparagraph "e" of paragraph 3 2 of Article 10 of this Law, in exceptional cases, if there is a real risk of recurrence of violence by the perpetrator. The assessment of the risk of recurrence of violence is carried out by an authorized police officer based on the risk assessment questionnaire defined by the protocol of the restraining order approved by the order of the Minister of Internal Affairs of Georgia. When assessing this risk, various circumstances are taken into account, including the fact and nature of violation of a restraining order and/or protective order issued against the perpetrator in the past, the fact of committing a violent crime in the past, the fact of threat by the perpetrator and/or the use/demonstration of cold/firearms when committing physical violence, and other circumstances.

3. Electronic monitoring of the perpetrator may be established at the time of issuing a restraining order, as well as at any time during the validity period of the restraining order.

4. An indication of the establishment of electronic monitoring of the perpetrator in the restraining order is made if electronic monitoring is established at the time of issuing the restraining order. At the same time, a protocol on the implementation of electronic monitoring is issued and it is submitted to the court for approval within 24 hours of issuance. In case of failure to submit the protocol on the implementation of electronic monitoring to the court within 24 hours for approval or in case of the court's refusal to approve this protocol, the initiated electronic monitoring measure must be immediately terminated.

5. The persons provided for in Article 11 of this Law have the right to request the establishment of electronic monitoring of the perpetrator.

6. The consent of the victim or their legal representative/procedural representative is necessary for the implementation of electronic monitoring. If a minor victim consents to the implementation of electronic monitoring, while their legal representative/procedural representative refuses, the decision is made in accordance with the best interests of the minor.

7. Electronic monitoring is carried out for no longer than the validity period of the restraining order.

8. The protocol on the implementation of electronic monitoring shall indicate:

a) the date and place of issuance of this protocol;

b) the circumstances that formed the basis for issuing this protocol;

c) the name, surname, date of birth, personal number and place of residence of the perpetrator;

d) information about the perpetrator's criminal record;

e) the name, surname, date of birth and personal number of the victim;

v) the victim's consent to the implementation of electronic monitoring;

z) the details of the restraining order for which the electronic monitoring measure is used;

t) the prohibition of the perpetrator's approach to the victim, their workplace and other places where the victim is located;

i) about the imposition of criminal liability on the perpetrator in case of entering the alarm zone defined by the electronic monitoring implementation procedure during the implementation of electronic monitoring or failure to comply with the authorized person's request to leave the alarm or buffer zone, as well as about the imposition of criminal liability in case of damage or destruction of the electronic device transferred for the purpose of implementing electronic monitoring, regarding the warning of the perpetrator;

k) other issues, the resolution of which is necessary for the implementation of electronic monitoring of the perpetrator.

9. The protocol on the implementation of electronic monitoring shall indicate the operating instructions for the electronic device, which are mandatory for execution.

10. The protocol on the implementation of electronic monitoring is signed by the person authorized to issue it, the victim and the perpetrator against whom this protocol was issued.

11. If the victim and/or the perpetrator for any reason cannot sign the protocol on the implementation of electronic monitoring, it is signed only by the person authorized to issue this protocol. In this case, an appropriate entry is made in the protocol on the implementation of electronic monitoring and the reason for the victim's and/or perpetrator's refusal to sign/inability to sign is indicated.

12. The protocol on the implementation of electronic monitoring comes into effect immediately upon issuance. This protocol is sent/delivered to the victim and the perpetrator within 24 hours of issuance. One copy of the protocol on the implementation of electronic monitoring remains with the issuing body, while one copy is submitted to the court for approval within 24 hours of the issuance of this protocol.

13. A copy of the protocol on the implementation of electronic monitoring is immediately sent to:

a) the relevant district service of the relevant territorial body of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia according to the victim's place of residence, for the purpose of responding to non-compliance with the requirements and obligations provided for by the protocol on the implementation of electronic monitoring;

b) the relevant structural subdivision of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia, for the purpose of entering information into the appropriate electronic database, rapid and effective response to violations and recording of statistical data;

c) LEPL "112", for the purpose of technical support for the implementation of electronic monitoring.

14. The electronic device transferred to the perpetrator for the purpose of implementing electronic monitoring consists of an electronic bracelet and a receiving device. Damage or destruction of this electronic device results in the imposition of criminal liability on the perpetrator.

15. The procedure for implementing electronic monitoring of the perpetrator is established by the order of the Minister of Internal Affairs of Georgia, which defines in detail the procedures for implementing electronic monitoring, including the parameters of the geographical zones (buffer zone and alarm zone) where approach to the victim is prohibited, the procedure for processing and storing personal data during the implementation of electronic monitoring and other issues.

16. If it is impossible to attach the electronic device to the perpetrator's body on site for the purpose of implementing electronic monitoring, an authorized police officer has the right to take the perpetrator to the nearest police station. When forcibly taking to the police station, the perpetrator is explained:

a) the basis for taking to the police station;

b) that they have the right to a lawyer;

c) that they have the right, if the perpetrator wishes, to inform a relative named by them of the fact and location of their taking to the police station, as well as the administration of their workplace or place of study.

17. When taking the perpetrator to the police station, a protocol on taking the person is drawn up. This protocol indicates: the date and place of drawing up the protocol; the name, surname and position of the official drawing up the protocol; information about the perpetrator; the time and basis for taking the perpetrator to the police station. This protocol is signed by the official who drew it up and the perpetrator. If the perpetrator refuses to sign the protocol, this is indicated in the protocol.

18. The perpetrator must remain at the police station for a reasonable time necessary to attach the electronic device to the body. The total time of their taking to the police station should not exceed 6 hours. The decision on taking the perpetrator is appealed according to the procedure established by the legislation of Georgia.

19. In case of issuance of the protocol on the implementation of electronic monitoring by an authorized police officer in the absence of the perpetrator on site, the police are authorized to summon the perpetrator to the authorized body of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia to attach the electronic device to the body. In case of the perpetrator's failure to appear at this body, the police are authorized to carry out their search on a nationwide scale.

20. The police are authorized to use proportional coercive measures if necessary to attach the electronic device to the perpetrator's body.

30/04/2026, 10:35 On the Prevention of Violence Against Women and/or Domestic Violence, Protection and Assistance of Victims of Violence | ... 21. Electronic monitoring is carried out within the jurisdiction of Georgia. The perpetrator/victim is prohibited from crossing the state border of Georgia with an electronic device. The perpetrator/victim is obliged to notify the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia in advance about their crossing of the state border of Georgia. The Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia is authorized to process information about the perpetrator's/victim's crossing of the state border of Georgia during the period defined by the protocol on the implementation of electronic monitoring. The implementation of electronic monitoring is suspended until the perpetrator's/victim's return to Georgia.

22. The application of measures (criminal mechanisms) provided for by the criminal legislation of Georgia against the perpetrator does not prevent the implementation of electronic monitoring of the perpetrator to ensure the protection of the victim. The imposition of a preventive measure – imprisonment, detention or imposition of administrative imprisonment is a basis for suspending the implementation of electronic monitoring of the perpetrator.

23. In case of accidental approach of the perpetrator and the victim, an employee of LEPL "112" is obliged to contact the perpetrator and request them to leave the relevant territory to avoid accidental meeting with the victim. The perpetrator is obliged to comply with the request of the employee of LEPL "112". Failure to comply with this request results in the imposition of criminal liability on the perpetrator.

24. During the implementation of electronic monitoring, the perpetrator's entry into the alarm zone defined by the electronic monitoring implementation procedure or failure to comply with the authorized person's request to leave the alarm or buffer zone or evasion of electronic monitoring results in the imposition of liability provided for by the Criminal Code of Georgia.

25. The applied electronic monitoring measure may be revoked prematurely by applying to the court:

a) due to a change in circumstances, including due to the perpetrator's serious illness, if the changed circumstances exclude the risk of recurrence of violence by the perpetrator;

b) if the victim applies to the police with a request to cancel the implementation of electronic monitoring.

26. Within 24 hours of the occurrence of the circumstances provided for in paragraph 25 of this article, the police apply to the court with a request to cancel the implementation of electronic monitoring. The court considers this issue within 24 hours of this application, according to the procedure established by the legislation of Georgia.

27. The revocation of the restraining order by the authorized body, the death of the perpetrator or the victim results in the automatic cancellation of the applied electronic monitoring measure.

28. An authorized police officer has the right to summon the perpetrator for the purpose of removing the electronic device or, in accordance with paragraphs 16-18 of this article, take them to the nearest police station.

29. The authorized body of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia has the right to process the personal data of the perpetrator/victim for the purpose of preventing violence against women and domestic violence, including data obtained as a result of electronic monitoring, data reflecting communication with the perpetrator/victim.

30. For the purpose of implementing electronic monitoring, information is exchanged between the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia, the Prosecutor's Office of Georgia, the Ministry of Internally Displaced Persons from the Occupied Territories, Labour, Health and Social Affairs of Georgia, the Ministry of Justice of Georgia, the court and, if necessary, other relevant agencies.

Law of Georgia of July 13, 2020 No. 6758 – website, 20.07.2020

Article 1

1. Right to request the issuance of restraining and protective orders

1. The right to request the issuance of restraining and protective orders belongs to the victim, a family member of the victim or, with the victim's consent, to a social worker or a person providing medical, legal, or psychological assistance to the victim, and in cases of violence against a minor – also to the guardianship and trusteeship authority.

2. In the case provided for by paragraph 4 of Article 17[1] of this Law, an authorized employee of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia assesses the information received from the victim. In the process of assessing the relevant risk, he/she is authorized to request from the penitentiary institution an individual assessment report of the convicted person. If the indicated information provides sufficient grounds for the assumption that violence against the victim may be repeated, the authorized employee of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia establishes the location of the person released from the penitentiary institution and, after obtaining appropriate explanations from him/her, makes a decision on the issuance of a restraining order or on the refusal to issue a restraining order. In the case of issuing a restraining order, the existence of a request by the person provided for in the first paragraph of this article is not mandatory for its issuance.

3. The police are authorized to issue a restraining order on their own initiative if there are sufficient grounds for the assumption that a person's constitutional rights and freedoms may be violated by disregarding or coercing him/her or/and by physical, psychological, economic, or sexual violence against him/her.

Law of Georgia of 28 December 2009 No. 2507-ssm, No. 3, 13.01.2010, Art. 4

Law of Georgia of 30 May 2018 No. 2394 – website, 08.06.2018

Law of Georgia of 20 September 2019 No. 5024 – website, 01.10.2019

Article 1

2. Term of validity of protective and restraining orders 1. A protective order is issued for a term of up to 9 months. The specific term of its validity is determined by the court.

2. The issue of changing the term of validity of a protective order is decided by the court. Extension of the term of validity of a protective order is possible during the period of validity of the order and for an additional period of no more than 3 months, if there is a threat to the victim or another family member.

3. In case of reconciliation of the parties, based on their joint application to the court/authorized employee of the police, the validity of protective and restraining orders may be cancelled by a decision of the judge/authorized employee of the police, as a result of comprehensive and complete examination of the circumstances of the case, except in cases where there is still a threat of committing violence against the victim or another member of his/her family, as well as in cases provided for by Article 13 of this Law.

4. A restraining order is issued for a term of up to 1 month.

Law of Georgia of 28 December 2009 No. 2507-ssmI, No. 3, 13.01.2010, Art. 4 Law of Georgia of 4 May 2017 No. 761 - website, 25.05.2017 Law of Georgia of 13 July 2020 No. 6758 – website, 20.07.2020

Article 1

3. Issuance and validity of protective and restraining orders during reconciliation of the victim and the abuser Reconciliation of the victim and the abuser does not prevent the issuance of protective and restraining orders and does not result in the cancellation of the validity of protective and restraining orders if there is still a threat of committing violence against the victim or another member of his/her family or if the fact of violence against a woman or/and domestic violence is contrary to the interests of other members of the victim's family (especially – a minor).

Law of Georgia of 28 December 2009 No. 2507-ssmI, No. 3, 13.01.2010, Art. 4 Law of Georgia of 4 May 2017 No. 761 - website, 25.05.2017

Chapter IV. Specific measures for the protection of minors from domestic violence

Article 1

4. Separation of a minor from an abusive parent, other legal representative or other person actually present with/living with the minor

1. In case of violence against a minor, the minor shall be separated from the abusive parent(s), other legal representative or any other abuser on the basis of a restraining order issued by an authorized employee of the police, and in cases determined by child protection referral procedures – on the basis of a decision made by a social worker.

2. Separation of a minor from the parent(s), other legal representative or any other person actually present with/living with the minor is an extreme measure, which is used only when all other, less severe measures (including conversation and warning) have been applied and these measures have not produced the desired result, or when it is obvious in the created situation that the use of a less severe measure will not ensure the protection of the minor's life and health. The minor's opinion about where he/she should be placed must be taken into account according to his/her age and level of development, and in any case the decision must be made taking into account the best interests of the minor. When making a decision, the police officer/social worker identifies signs of violence and interviews the victim and persons who can provide useful information to him/her. If necessary, the police officer/social worker calls emergency medical assistance and, before making a decision, consults with the doctor of the emergency medical assistance brigade that arrived on the scene. Based on this, the police officer/social worker assesses the case and, taking into account the risks to the minor's safety, makes a decision on the separation of the minor in accordance with the procedure established by child protection referral procedures. As soon as the social worker makes a decision on the separation of the minor, he/she applies to the police, which ensures the immediate execution of the decision.

3. In the presence of forms of domestic violence, in the case of an application to the court by the person provided for in Article 11 of this Law with a request to issue a protective order, the court considers the issue of the relationship of the abusive parent(s) or other legal representative with the minor. In the presence of traces of violence against the minor, the issue of separation of the minor from the abusive parent(s), other legal representative or other abuser may be raised before the court as a temporary measure until the court makes a final decision.

4. When considering the issue of the right of representation of a minor, the circumstance that leaving the right of representation of the minor to the abusive parent(s) or other legal representative may be harmful to the interests of the minor must be taken into account. It is inadmissible to leave the parents the right of joint custody over the minor if there is a reasonable suspicion of violence by one of the parents against him/her.

5. In cases provided for by the legislation of Georgia, a minor from the age of 14 has the right to apply to the court to protect his/her rights and legitimate interests. In this case, the court appoints a procedural representative and considers the case. The minor plaintiff has the right not to agree with his/her procedural representative and to defend himself/herself. The court is obliged to involve the guardianship and trusteeship authority in such a case.

6. In the case provided for in the first paragraph of this article, the decision of the social worker may be appealed in accordance with the procedure established by the legislation of Georgia. Appeal of the decision does not suspend its validity.

Law of Georgia of 28 December 2009 No. 2507-ssmI, No. 3, 13.01.2010, Art. 4

Law of Georgia of 22 June 2016 No. 5446 - website, 12.07.2016

Article 1

4¹. Detection of a fact of domestic violence against a minor

1. Medical institutions, educational and upbringing institutions, guardianship and trusteeship bodies and their authorized employees, as well as other relevant institutions involved in child protection referral procedures and their authorized employees, are obliged to detect (primary identification) a fact of domestic violence against a minor and to contact the relevant bodies in order to respond to it.

2. Failure by a subject involved in child protection referral procedures (an institution and/or its authorized employee) to fulfill the obligation to detect a fact of violence against a minor and to provide information about violence against a minor to the relevant state body shall result in liability in the manner established by the legislation of Georgia.

Law of Georgia of 17 October 2014 No. 2697 - website, 31.10.2014.

Law of Georgia of 22 June 2016 No. 5446 - website, 12.07.2016.

Law of Georgia of 11 December 2019 No. 5463 - website, 19.12.2019.

Article 1

4². Child protection referral procedures

Child protection referral procedures shall be approved by the Government of Georgia.

Law of Georgia of 22 June 2016 No. 5446 - website, 12.07.2016.

Article 1

5. Prevention of abduction of a minor and ensuring other types of safety

1. The court shall determine by its decision the terms for visitation of a minor by an abusive parent. An abusive parent may be granted the right to visit a minor only if all safety measures are observed in relation to him/her, which may include the place, time, frequency, duration of visitation of the minor and the person responsible for observing the safety requirements/measures of the minor.

2. If safety measures are not observed in relation to the minor, the right of the abusive parent to visit the minor shall be restricted. If such restriction lasts for more than 3 months, the parent whose right is restricted may apply to the court with a request to change the conditions of visitation of the minor.

3. In case of a real threat of abduction of a minor by an abuser or causing other harm to him/her, the abuser may be prohibited by a court decision from his/her right to visit until the circumstances change.

Law of Georgia of 28 December 2009 No. 2507 - SSM, No. 3, 13.01.2010, Article 4

Chapter V. Peculiarities of legal proceedings on a fact of violence against women and/or domestic violence

Law of Georgia of 4 May 2017 No. 761 - website, 25.05.2017.

Article 1

6. Obligations of the police

1. The police are obliged, upon receiving information about a fact of violence against women and/or domestic violence, to respond immediately and implement measures provided for by law.

2. Upon receiving a notification about a fact of violence, the police are obliged to appear immediately at the scene of the incident, regardless of whether the victim, a witness to the violence or a person provided for by Article 11 of this Law contacted the police bodies.

3. In case of existence of a fact of violence, the police are obliged to:

a) take measures provided for by law to prevent a fact of violence against women and/or domestic violence;

b) separately question the alleged victim, witness, abuser, including a minor, which must be recorded in writing;

c) provide the victim with information about his/her rights;

d) at the request of the victim or in urgent cases, ensure his/her transfer to a medical institution;

e) at the request of the victim, as well as in urgent cases with the consent of the victim, ensure the transfer of the victim and persons dependent on him/her to a shelter;

v) in case of transfer of the victim to another place, ensure the removal of items of primary necessity and identification documents from his/her place of residence;

v1) if necessary, remove the abuser from the victim's place of residence on the basis of this Law and ensure the safety of the victim;

z) ensure the safety of the person who reported the fact of violence;

t) issue a restraining order in the manner and under the conditions established by this Law;

i) issue an order restricting rights related to weapons in case of non-compliance with the decision made by a social worker regarding the separation of a minor.

3¹. An order restricting rights related to weapons, which is issued for a period of 1 month, shall determine the restrictions provided for by the Law of Georgia "On Weapons". The form of the order restricting rights related to weapons shall be approved by the Minister of Internal Affairs of Georgia.

4. The police shall draw up a report on a fact of violence against women and/or domestic violence and the measures taken, which shall be submitted to the supervising prosecutor.

5. The police are obliged to separately highlight in their report data on facts of violence against women and/or domestic violence, measures taken, the number of victims, actions taken against the abuser, as well as other data about the abuser.

6. The police shall supervise the fulfillment of the requirements and conditions provided for by the issued protective, restraining and orders restricting rights related to weapons.

7. The procedure for supervising the fulfillment of the requirements and conditions provided for by the protective, restraining and orders restricting rights related to weapons shall be established by the order of the Minister of Internal Affairs of Georgia.

Law of Georgia of 28 December 2009 No. 2507 - SSMI, No. 3, 13.01.2010, Article 4
Law of Georgia of 17 October 2014 No. 2697 - website, 31.10.2014.
Law of Georgia of 22 June 2016 No. 5446 - website, 12.07.2016.
Law of Georgia of 4 May 2017 No. 761 - website, 25.05.2017.
Law of Georgia of 20 September 2019 No. 5024 - website, 01.10.2019.
Law of Georgia of 13 July 2020 No. 6758 - website, 20.07.2020.

Article 1

6 1. Granting victim status

1. Granting victim status, together with the state bodies defined by this Law (relevant bodies of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia, investigative bodies, court), shall also be ensured by the victim identification group, if the process of issuing a protective order or restraining order is not underway to ensure the protection of the victim or criminal prosecution measures are not being carried out in connection with violence against women and/or domestic violence. The victim status granted by the victim identification group shall be valid for 18 months from the granting, and if the victim uses a shelter - for the period determined by this Law for placement of the victim in a shelter.

2. The composition, status, functions, powers and rules of operation of the Inter-Agency Commission on Gender Equality, Violence against Women and Domestic Violence shall be determined by the Regulation of the Inter-Agency Commission, which shall be approved by the Government of Georgia.

3. The procedure for victim identification and determination of victim status by the victim identification group shall be established by a resolution of the Government of Georgia.

Law of Georgia of 28 December 2009 No. 2507 - SSMI, No. 3, 13.01.2010, Article 4

Law of Georgia of 20 September 2013 No. 1251 - website, 08.10.2013.

Law of Georgia of 17 September 2014 No. 2697 - website, 31.10.2014.

Law of Georgia of 4 May 2017 No. 761 - website, 25.05.2017.

Chapter VI. Rights of the victim, his/her social protection and labor guarantees; measures aimed at correcting the abuser's attitudes and behavior

Law of Georgia of 17 October 2014 No. 2697 - website, 31.10.2014.
Law of Georgia of 4 May 2017 No. 761 - website, 25.05.2017.

Article 1

7. Rights of the victim/alleged victim and guarantees for their protection

1. The victim/alleged victim is entitled, in accordance with the procedure established by the legislation of Georgia, to:

a) apply to the relevant state body with a request to issue a protective order or restraining order, and in case of violation of the conditions of the issued protective order or restraining order – with a request to respond to it;

b) apply to the relevant state body, taking into account the severity of the fact of violence against women and/or domestic violence, or in case of violation of the conditions of issued protective and restraining orders, with a request to use criminal law mechanisms for detecting and preventing violence against women and/or domestic violence;

b1) request the establishment of electronic supervision of the perpetrator in accordance with the procedure established by this Law;

c) apply to the relevant judicial body with a request for compensation by the perpetrator for damage caused to them as a result of violence against women and/or domestic violence;

[d) receive compensation if the damage caused to them as a result of violence against women and/or domestic violence is not compensated in accordance with subparagraph "c" of this paragraph and/or from other sources provided for by this Law and other legislative and subordinate normative acts of Georgia for victim service and protection; (to enter into force from January 1, 2023)]

e) use shelter/crisis center and the services available there;

f) when placed in a shelter/crisis center, use free legal consultation, free primary and emergency medical service and psychological assistance;

g) during stay in a shelter/crisis center, use the right to suspend employment relationship. The period of its suspension shall not exceed 30 calendar days per year;

h) apply to the relevant state body to obtain a temporary residence permit for stay in Georgia, if they are a foreign national or stateless person;

i) use legal aid at the expense of the state in accordance with the procedure established by the Law of Georgia "On Legal Aid";

j) use other mechanisms of social and legal protection provided for by this Law and other legislative and subordinate normative acts of Georgia.

2. In the case of domestic crime, violence against women and/or domestic violence, when implementing criminal prosecution measures, special protection measures provided for by the Criminal Procedure Code of Georgia may be used to ensure the protection of persons injured as a result of domestic crime, violence against women and/or domestic violence and other subjects participating in the process.

3. At all stages of criminal proceedings on domestic crime, violence against women and/or domestic violence, including during interrogation, the best interests of a minor witness and minor victim must be taken into account, in accordance with their age and level of development. In connection with domestic crime, violence against women and/or domestic violence, it is inadmissible to interrogate a minor witness and minor victim, as well as to interview (obtain explanation) from a minor victim of violence against women and/or domestic violence in the presence of the alleged perpetrator parent(s) when issuing a protective order or restraining order. It is also inadmissible to involve in the criminal proceedings as a legal representative of a minor a person who is an alleged perpetrator or whose impartiality is in doubt due to the nature of the relationship between this person and the perpetrator family member or in other cases of conflict of interest, as well as to disclose or transfer to them the testimony (interview record, explanation) given by the minor. In these cases, the parent's authority to be the representative of the minor in criminal/administrative proceedings is considered suspended during the proceedings in court, until the final resolution of the dispute. The guardianship and trusteeship body appoints a representative of the minor who represents the minor's interests during the court hearing of the case.

4. If the victim is a citizen of a foreign country or a stateless person, a temporary residence permit shall be issued to them in accordance with the procedure established by the legislation of Georgia on the basis of a petition from the victim service institution or the body conducting the proceedings.

5. If the victim is a citizen of a foreign country or a stateless person, they may not be returned to a foreign country if there is a presumption that in case of return there, their safety will not be protected and ensured.

Law of Georgia of December 28, 2009 No. 2507-SSM, No. 3, 13.01.2010, Art. 4 Law of Georgia of October 17, 2014 No. 2697 - website, 31.10.2014 Law of Georgia of June 22, 2016 No. 5446 - website, 12.07.2016 Law of Georgia of May 4, 2017 No. 761 - website, 25.05.2017 Law of Georgia of July 13, 2020 No. 6758 - website, 20.07.2020 Law of Georgia of December 30, 2021 No. 1345 - website, 31.12.2021

Article 1

7[1]. Informing the victim and implementing preventive measures

1. The bodies issuing protective and restraining orders, the victim identification group, the body conducting criminal proceedings related to violence against women and/or domestic violence, the victim service institution and other authorized body determined by the legislation of Georgia are obliged to provide the victim with information in a language and form understandable to them about the mechanisms of social and legal protection and assistance for victims existing in the country and the types of relevant services.

2. The victim service institution and other authorized body determined by the legislation of Georgia provide the victim, when necessary, with information and appropriate assistance in drafting applications (claims) related to violence against women and/or domestic violence and claims for compensation for damage caused as a result of violence against women and/or domestic violence and in the relevant proceedings.

3. The penitentiary institution is obliged to immediately send written notification of the circumstances provided for by paragraph 4 of this article to the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia.

4. The Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia is obliged, on the basis of information provided by the penitentiary institution, to immediately notify the victim of the release from the penitentiary institution, escape, short-term exit outside the detention institution in accordance with the procedure established by Article 27 of the Imprisonment Code, exit from the detention institution for preparation for release in accordance with the procedure established by part 3 of Article 71[6] of the same Code of the person who committed violence against them (perpetrator), as well as to implement the measures provided for by paragraph 2 of Article 11 of this Law.

5. An authorized employee of the Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia draws up a record of the interview with the victim. In this record, they must indicate the victim's attitude towards the convict, the convict's attitude towards the victim during the period of serving the sentence and other information that may be significant for assessing the risk of recurrence of violence against the victim.

Law of Georgia of October 17, 2014 No. 2697 - website, 31.10.2014

Law of Georgia of May 1, 2015 No. 3557 - website, 18.05.2015

Law of Georgia of May 4, 2017 No. 761 - website, 25.05.2017

Law of Georgia of June 1, 2017 No. 955 - website, 20.06.2017

Law of Georgia of September 20, 2019 No. 5024 - website, 01.10.2019

30/04/2026, 10:35  On Prevention of Violence Against Women and/or Domestic Violence, Protection and Assistance of Victims of Violence | ...

This excerpt sits under: Attention! The version you are currently viewing does not represent the last edition of the document. To view the last edition of the document, select the appropriate consolidated v

Article 1

7². Victims' Temporary Shelter (Refuge)

1. The victims' temporary shelter (refuge) existing in the system of the Ministry of Internally Displaced Persons from the Occupied Territories of Georgia, Labour, Health and Social Affairs must create living conditions for the victim and must ensure the possibility of using primary and urgent medical services and psychological assistance.

2. The creation of a shelter by a non-entrepreneurial (non-commercial) legal person is permissible if it satisfies the minimum standards established by the Ministry of Internally Displaced Persons from the Occupied Territories of Georgia, Labour, Health and Social Affairs for this type of institution.

3. The activity of the shelter is regulated by its statute (internal regulations), which determines the procedure for placing the victim in the shelter and rehabilitation.

Law of Georgia of 17 October 2014 No. 2697 - website, 31.10.2014

Law of Georgia of 4 May 2017 No. 761 - website, 25.05.2017

Law of Georgia of 5 July 2018 No. 3105 – website, 11.07.2018

Article 1

8. Placement of the Victim in a Shelter

1. In the case of the existence of a fact of violence against women or/and domestic violence, in the event of a request for shelter by the victim, law enforcement agencies ensure the transfer of the victim and persons dependent on him/her to the shelter.

2. The placement of the victim in the shelter is for a period of up to 3 months. If necessary, this period is extended in the manner established by the statute (internal regulations) of the shelter, except in the case when the victim does not wish to remain there for longer than the above-mentioned period. After the expiration of the period of placement in the shelter, in the case of the existence of a threat to the victim, the administration of the shelter is obliged to notify law enforcement agencies of this for the purpose of ensuring further response.

3. In the case of placement of the victim in a shelter or crisis centre, he/she retains his/her workplace in the same position.

Law of Georgia of 28 December 2009 No. 2507-SSMI, No. 3, 13.01.2010, Art. 4

Law of Georgia of 4 May 2017 No. 761 - website, 25.05.2017

Law of Georgia of 13 July 2020 No. 6758 – website, 20.07.2020

Article 1

8¹. Crisis Centre

1. A crisis centre is a place of temporary accommodation for alleged victims and victims and serves their psychological-social rehabilitation, primary and urgent medical services and legal assistance.

2. A crisis centre is created in the system of the Ministry of Internally Displaced Persons from the Occupied Territories of Georgia, Labour, Health and Social Affairs or/and on the basis of a non-entrepreneurial legal person. A crisis centre created by a non-entrepreneurial legal person must satisfy the minimum standards established by the Ministry of Internally Displaced Persons from the Occupied Territories of Georgia, Labour, Health and Social Affairs for this type of institution.

Law of Georgia of 28 December 2009 No. 2507-SSMI, No. 3, 13.01.2010, Art. 4

Law of Georgia of 4 May 2017 No. 761 - website, 25.05.2017

Law of Georgia of 5 July 2018 No. 3105 – website, 11.07.2018

Article 1

8². Preservation of the Right to Temporary Use of Housing for the Victim

If the victim does not use a shelter/crisis centre and wishes to remain at his/her place of residence by protective or restraining order, the issue of temporary removal of the abuser from the victim's place of residence is determined. The police are authorised, in accordance with a protective or restraining order, to remove the abuser from the victim's place of residence even in the case when this place is the property of the abuser.

Law of Georgia of 17 October 2014 No. 2697 - website, 31.10.2014

Law of Georgia of 4 May 2017 No. 761 - website, 25.05.2017

Article 1

8³. Restriction Established for Shelter/Crisis Centre Personnel

A person convicted of a crime against sexual freedom and inviolability provided for by the Law of Georgia "On Combating Crimes Against Sexual Freedom and Inviolability" may not be employed in a shelter/crisis centre, regardless of the removal or annulment of the conviction.

Law of Georgia of 17 March 2020 No. 5769 – website, 23.03.2020

Article 1

9. Information about the Victim

Information received about the identity of the victim, his/her health and psychological condition is confidential and its disclosure is possible only in the manner established by law.

Law of Georgia of 4 May 2017 No. 761 - website, 25.05.2017

Article 1

9¹. Free Telephone Assistance

1. To ensure assistance to victims/alleged victims and the provision of consultation on relevant issues, a free, 24-hour emergency service telephone number is created, which is accessible throughout the entire territory of the country.

2. Through the free, 24-hour emergency service telephone number, any interested person is provided with information about response mechanisms in the case of violence against women or/and domestic violence and victim protection measures.

3. The telephone assistance network functions with the protection of confidentiality. Disclosure of information received through this network is inadmissible, except for exceptions established by the legislation of Georgia.

Law of Georgia of 17 October 2014 No. 2697 - website, 31.10.2014

Law of Georgia of 4 May 2017 No. 761 - website, 25.05.2017

Article 2

0. Measures Aimed at Correcting the Abuser's Attitudes and Behaviour

Measures aimed at correcting the abuser's attitudes and behaviour mean measures aimed at changing the abuser's violent behaviour and his/her psychological-social assistance, the purpose of which is to prevent the recurrence of violence and ensure the safety of the victim, recognition by the abuser of responsibility for violent behaviour and its consequences, as well as maintaining positive changes achieved in his/her attitudes and behaviour. To achieve them, it is important for the abuser to complete a mandatory training course oriented towards changing violent attitudes and behaviour. Measures aimed at correcting the abuser's attitudes and behaviour and the procedure and forms of their implementation are determined by a resolution of the Government of Georgia.

Law of Georgia of 17 October 2014 No. 2697 - website, 31.10.2014

Law of Georgia of 28 December 2009 No. 2507-SSMI, No. 3, 13.01.2010, Art. 4

Law of Georgia of 28 October 2015 No. 4455 - website, 11.11.2015

Law of Georgia of 4 May 2017 No. 761 - website, 25.05.2017

Chapter VII. Transitional Provisions

Article 2

1. Measures to be Implemented in Connection with the Entry into Force of the Law

1. The Ministry of Internally Displaced Persons from the Occupied Territories of Georgia, Labour, Health and Social Affairs of Georgia shall determine the minimum standards necessary for the arrangement of temporary accommodation (shelter) for victims and ensure their establishment.

2. The Ministry of Internally Displaced Persons from the Occupied Territories of Georgia, Labour, Health and Social Affairs of Georgia shall determine the mechanisms for the provision of social services in connection with issues of violence against women and/or domestic violence and ensure the training (certification) of relevant social workers by 1 September 2017.

3. The Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia shall ensure the development and approval of the form of a restraining order for a fact of domestic violence within 1 month from the publication of this Law.

4. (deleted - 04.05.2017, №761).

5. The Government of Georgia shall ensure the development of mechanisms for cooperation between agencies for the exchange of existing information on violence against women and/or domestic violence.

6. The Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia shall ensure the creation of a database on perpetrators and issued protective and restraining orders, as well as on the confiscation of weapons from a perpetrator by a police officer in case of non-compliance with a decision made by a social worker on the separation of a minor, the timely provision and accessibility of this information to interested state bodies.

7. The Ministry of Internally Displaced Persons from the Occupied Territories of Georgia, Labour, Health and Social Affairs of Georgia shall determine the minimum standards necessary for the arrangement and functioning of a crisis centre by 1 July 2010.

8. The Government of Georgia shall ensure the adoption of the resolutions provided for by paragraphs 1[1] and 2 of Article 16[1] of this Law by 1 April 2014.

9. Until the adoption of the normative acts provided for by paragraph 8 of this article by the Government of Georgia, legal force shall be retained by Decree №665 of the President of Georgia of 5 October 2009 "On Approval of the Rule for Identification of Victims of Domestic Violence" and Decree №625 of the President of Georgia of 26 December 2008 "On Approval of the Composition and Regulations of the Interagency Council Implementing Measures for the Prevention of Domestic Violence".

10. The Government of Georgia shall ensure the implementation of measures necessary for the organisation of a mandatory training course oriented towards changing violent attitudes and behaviour provided for by a protective order, to be completed by a perpetrator, as well as the designation of the state body authorised to organise this course, by 1 October 2015.

11. The Government of Georgia, upon the submission of the Ministry of Internally Displaced Persons from the Occupied Territories of Georgia, Labour, Health and Social Affairs of Georgia, shall approve the amount of compensation to be issued to a victim and the rule for issuing compensation by 1 January 2023.

12. The Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia shall ensure the development and approval of the form of a protocol on the implementation of electronic monitoring by 1 September 2020.

13. The Ministry of Internal Affairs of Georgia shall ensure the development and approval of the rule for the implementation of electronic monitoring by 1 September 2020.

Law of Georgia of 28 December 2009 №2507-ssm I, №3, 13.01.2010, Article 4

Law of Georgia of 20 September 2013 №1251 – website, 08.10.2013.

Law of Georgia of 17 October 2014 №2697 - website, 31.10.2014.

Law of Georgia of 24 July 2015 №4105 - website, 04.08.2015.

Law of Georgia of 22 June 2016 №5446 - website, 12.07.2016.
Law of Georgia of 4 May 2017 №761 - website, 25.05.2017.
Law of Georgia of 13 July 2020 №6758 – website, 20.07.2020.
Law of Georgia of 30 December 2021 №1344 – website, 31.12.2021.

Chapter VIII. Final Provisions

Article 2

2. Entry into Force of the Law
1. This Law, except for Article 8 and Chapter VI, shall enter into force upon publication.
2. Article 8 and Chapter VI of this Law shall enter into force from 1 January 2008.
3. The operation of Articles 8 and 20 of this Law shall be suspended until 1 July 2016.
4. The operation of subparagraph "i" of the first paragraph of Article 17 of this Law shall be suspended until 1 December 2014, and the operation of Article 19[1] – until 1 May 2015.
Law of Georgia of 28 December 2009 №2507-ssm, №3, 13.01.2010, Article 4
Law of Georgia of 17 October 2014 №2697 - website, 31.10.2014.
Law of Georgia of 24 July 2015 №4105 - website, 04.08.2015.

President of Georgia M. Saakashvili
Tbilisi, 25 May 2006. №3143-s

24. 15/12/2023 - Law of Georgia - 4004-XIIIss-chak - website, 26/12/2023 (ka/document/view/6001519)
23. 30/11/2023 - Law of Georgia - 3853-XIIIss-chak - website, 15/12/2023 (ka/document/view/5982425)
22. 22/12/2022 - Law of Georgia - 2477-chis-chak - website, 29/12/2022 - the amendment contains a transitional provision (ka/document/view/5653475)
21. 30/12/2021 - Law of Georgia - 1345-VIIss-chak - website, 31/12/2021 (ka/document/view/5327824)
20. 30/12/2021 - Law of Georgia - 1344-VIIss-chak - website, 31/12/2021 (ka/document/view/5327731)
19. 16/03/2021 - Law of Georgia - 367-IVss-chak - website, 18/03/2021 (ka/document/view/5118282)
18. 13/07/2020 - Law of Georgia - 6758-chis - website, 20/07/2020 (ka/document/view/4923612)
17. 17/03/2020 - Law of Georgia - 5769-IIIs - website, 23/03/2020 - the amendment contains a transitional provision (ka/document/view/4784363)
16. 11/12/2019 - Law of Georgia - 5463-IIs - website, 19/12/2019 (ka/document/view/4716925)
15. 20/09/2019 - Law of Georgia - 5024-IIs - website, 01/10/2019 - the amendment contains a transitional provision (ka/document/view/4611050)
14. 05/07/2018 - Law of Georgia - 3105-chis - website, 11/07/2018 (ka/document/view/4247203)
13. 30/05/2018 - Law of Georgia - 2394-IIIs - website, 08/06/2018 (ka/document/view/4206478)
12. 22/12/2017 - Law of Georgia - 1820-chis - website, 11/01/2018 - the amendment contains a transitional provision (ka/document/view/3975127)
11. 01/06/2017 - Law of Georgia - 955-IIIs - website, 20/06/2017 (ka/document/view/3690578)
10. 04/05/2017 - Law of Georgia - 761-IIIs - website, 25/05/2017 - the amendment contains a transitional provision (ka/document/view/3665073)
9. 04/05/2017 - Law of Georgia - 752-IIIs - website, 24/05/2017 (ka/document/view/3661727)
8. 22/06/2016 - Law of Georgia - 5446-IIIs - website, 12/07/2016 - the amendment contains a transitional provision (ka/document/view/3320717)
7. 19/02/2016 - Law of Georgia - 4744-IIIs - website, 25/02/2016 (ka/document/view/3195515)
6. 28/10/2015 - Law of Georgia - 4455-IIs - website, 11/11/2015 (ka/document/view/3038737)
5. 24/07/2015 - Law of Georgia - 4105-chis - website, 04/08/2015 (ka/document/view/2933332)
4. 01/05/2015 - Law of Georgia - 3557-IIIs - website, 18/05/2015 (ka/document/view/2834070)
3. 17/10/2014 - Law of Georgia - 2697-IIs - website, 31/10/2014 (ka/document/view/2555086)
2. 20/09/2013 - Law of Georgia - 1251-IIs - website, 08/10/2013 - the amendment contains a transitional provision (ka/document/view/2029683)
1. 28/12/2009 - Law of Georgia - 2507 - ssm, 3, 13/01/2010 (ka/document/view/91360)

This excerpt sits under: Attention! The version you are currently viewing does not represent the last edition of the document. To view the last edition of the document, select the appropriate consolidated v
