Act on Civil Law Protection against Acts of Violence and Stalking

Act on Civil Law Protection against Acts of Violence and Stalking
(Protection against Violence Act - GewSchG)
Unofficial Table of Contents GewSchG
Date of issue: 11.12.2001 Full citation:
"Protection against Violence Act of 11 December 2001 (BGBl. I p. 3513), last amended by Article 2 of the Act of
10 August 2021 (BGBl. I p. 3513)"

Status:	Last amended by Art. 2 of the Act of 10.8.2021 1 3513 Further details on the status information can be found in the menu under Notes Footnote
(+++ Text evidence from: 1. 1.2002 +++)

The Act was adopted by the Bundestag as Article 1 of the Act of 11.12.2001 1 3513. It entered into force on

Art. 13

para. 2 of this Act on 1.1.2002.
Unofficial Table of Contents

§ 1 Court measures for protection against violence and stalking

(1)	If a person has intentionally and unlawfully violated the body, health, freedom or sexual self-determination of another person, the court shall, upon application by the injured person, take the measures necessary to prevent further violations. The orders shall be limited in time; the time limit may be extended. The court may in particular order that the perpetrator refrain from
1.
entering the dwelling of the injured person,
2.
being present within a certain radius of the dwelling of the injured person,
3.
visiting certain other places where the injured person regularly stays,
4.
making contact with the injured person, including by using means of telecommunication,
5.
bringing about encounters with the injured person,

insofar as this is not necessary for the protection of legitimate interests.
(2)	Paragraph 1 applies correspondingly if
1.
a person has unlawfully threatened another person with a violation of life, body, health, freedom or sexual self-determination or
2.
a person unlawfully and intentionally a)
enters the dwelling of another person or their enclosed property or
b)
unreasonably harasses another person by repeatedly stalking them against their expressly declared will or pursuing them using means of telecommunication.
In the case of sentence 1 no. 2 letter b, unreasonable harassment does not exist if the act serves the protection of legitimate interests.
(3)	In the cases of paragraph 1 sentence 1 or paragraph 2, the court may also order the measures under paragraph 1 if a person committed the act in a state of pathological mental disorder excluding free determination of will into which they temporarily placed themselves through alcoholic beverages or similar means.
Unofficial Table of Contents

§ 2 Assignment of a jointly used dwelling

(1)	If the injured person was maintaining a permanent joint household with the perpetrator at the time of an act under § 1 para. 1 sentence 1, also in conjunction with para. 3, they may demand that the perpetrator assign the jointly used dwelling to them for sole use.
(2)	The duration of the assignment of the dwelling shall be limited in time if the injured person and the perpetrator jointly hold ownership, heritable building right or usufruct of the land on which the dwelling is located, or if the injured person has rented the dwelling together with the perpetrator. If the perpetrator alone or together with a third party holds ownership, heritable building right or usufruct of the land on which the dwelling is located, or if they have rented the dwelling alone or together with a third party, the court shall limit the assignment of the dwelling to the injured person to a maximum duration of six months. If the injured person was unable to obtain other appropriate housing at reasonable conditions within the time limit determined by the court under sentence 2, the court may extend the time limit by a maximum of another six months, unless overriding interests of the perpetrator or the third party preclude this. Sentences 1 to 3 apply correspondingly to condominium ownership, permanent residential right and real residential right.
(3)	The claim under paragraph 1 is excluded
1.
if further violations are not to be feared, unless the injured person cannot reasonably be expected to continue living together with the perpetrator due to the severity of the act or
2.
if the injured person does not demand the assignment of the dwelling from the perpetrator in writing within three months after the act or
3.
insofar as particularly serious interests of the perpetrator preclude the assignment of the dwelling to the injured person.
(4)	If the dwelling has been assigned to the injured person for use, the perpetrator shall refrain from anything that is suitable to obstruct or frustrate the exercise of this right of use.
(5)	The perpetrator may demand compensation from the injured person for the use, insofar as this corresponds to equity.

(6)	If the threatened person was maintaining a permanent joint household with the perpetrator at the time of a threat under § 1 para. 2 sentence 1 no. 1, also in conjunction with para. 3, they may demand the assignment of the jointly used dwelling if this is necessary to avoid undue hardship. Undue hardship may also exist if the welfare of children living in the household is impaired. Otherwise, paragraphs 2 to 5 apply correspondingly.
Unofficial Table of Contents

§ 3 Scope of application, concurrences

(1)	If the injured or threatened person is under parental care, guardianship or curatorship for minors at the time of an act under § 1 para. 1 or para. 2 sentence 1, the provisions governing the parental care, guardianship or curatorship relationship shall apply in relation to the parents and persons with parental responsibility in place of §§ 1 and 2.
(2)	Further claims of the injured person are not affected by this Act. Unofficial Table of Contents

§ 4 Criminal provisions

Anyone who acts in violation of a specific enforceable 1.
order under § 1 paragraph 1 sentence 1 or 3, in each case also in conjunction with paragraph 2 sentence 1, or
2.
obligation arising from a settlement, insofar as the settlement has been confirmed under § 214a sentence 1 of the Act on Proceedings in Family Matters and in Matters of Non-contentious Jurisdiction in conjunction with § 1 paragraph 1 sentence 1 or 3 of this Act, in each case also in conjunction with § 1 paragraph 2 sentence 1 of this Act,
shall be punished with imprisonment for up to two years or with a fine. Criminal liability under other provisions remains unaffected.
