Law 3500/2006

Law 3500/2006
For the confrontation of domestic violence and other provisions.

Article 1

CHAPTER A GENERAL PROVISIONS
For the purposes of this law, the following are considered:

1. domestic violence, the commission of a punishable act, against a member of the family, in accordance with articles 6, 7, 8 and 9 of this law and articles 299 and 311 of the Penal Code.

2. a. family or community consisting of spouses or parents and relatives of the first and second degree by blood or by affinity and their adopted children.

β. the family includes, provided they cohabit, relatives by blood or by affinity up to the fourth degree and persons whose guardian, judicial assistant or foster parent has been appointed a member of the family, as well as any minor person who cohabits in the family.
γ. the provisions of this law also apply to the permanent partner of the man or to the permanent partner of the woman and to the children, common or of one of them, provided that these persons cohabit, as well as to former spouses.

3. victim of domestic violence every person of the preceding paragraph against whom a punishable act is committed according to articles 6, 7, 8 and 9 of this law. A victim is also the member, in whose family a punishable act was committed, according to articles 299 and 311 of the Penal Code, as well as the minor according to paragraph 2, in whose presence one of the punishable acts of this law is committed.

Article 2

The exercise of violence of any form between members of the family is prohibited.

Article 3

CHAPTER B CIVIL PROVISIONS

The second sentence of article 1439 of the Civil Code is replaced.

Article 4

In case of exercise of physical violence against a minor, as a means of discipline in the context of upbringing, article 1532 of the Civil Code applies.

Article 5

The monetary satisfaction according to article 932 of the Civil Code, due to moral damage of the injured party for one of the acts of this law, cannot be less than one thousand (1,000) euros, unless the injured party himself requested a smaller amount.

Article 6

CHAPTER C PENAL PROVISIONS

1. The member of the family who causes to another member thereof bodily harm or injury to his health, within the meaning of subparagraph a' of paragraph 1 of article 308 of the Penal Code, or with continuous conduct causes entirely slight harm or injury to his health, within the meaning of subparagraph b' of the above provision, is punished with imprisonment of at least one year.

2. If the act of the first paragraph is capable of causing to the victim danger to his life or serious bodily injury, imprisonment of at least two years is imposed. If serious bodily or mental illness of the victim follows, imprisonment of up to ten years is imposed. If the perpetrator pursued or knew and accepted the result of his act, he is punished with imprisonment.

3. If the act of the first paragraph was committed against a pregnant woman or against a member of the family who, for any reason, is unable to resist, it is punished with imprisonment of at least two years and if the act was committed in the presence of a minor member of the family, it is punished with imprisonment of at least one year.

4. If the act of the first paragraph constitutes systematic infliction of intense physical pain or physical exhaustion, dangerous to health, or mental pain, capable of causing serious mental injury, especially through prolonged isolation of the victim, imprisonment is imposed. If the victim is a minor, imprisonment of at least ten years is imposed.

5. The provisions of the preceding paragraphs apply correspondingly also when the perpetrator works in a provider of social care, and his act is directed against a person who receives the services of that provider.

Article 7

1. The member of the family who compels another member using violence or threat of serious and immediate danger to an act, omission or tolerance without the victim being obliged to do so is punished with imprisonment of at least six months, regardless of whether the threatened harm is directed against the victim himself or one of his relatives within the meaning of subparagraph b' of article 13 of the Penal Code.

2. The member of the family who causes terror or anxiety to another member of the family, threatening him with violence or other unlawful act or omission, is punished with imprisonment.

Article 8

1. Paragraph 1 of article 336 of the Penal Code is replaced.

2. Paragraph 1 of article 338 of the Penal Code is replaced.

Article 9

1. The member of the family who insults the dignity of another member thereof, with particularly humiliating word or act relating to his sexual life, is punished with imprisonment of up to two years.

2. With imprisonment of at least six months up to three years is punished the act of the preceding paragraph, if the injured party is a minor.

3. The provisions of the preceding paragraphs apply correspondingly also when the perpetrator works in a provider of social care, and his act is directed against a person who receives the services of that provider.

Article 10

Whoever in a case of domestic violence threatens a witness or member of his family or exercises violence against him or bribes him, with the purpose of obstructing the administration of justice, is punished with imprisonment of at least three months up to three years.

Article 11

CHAPTER D

PENAL MEDIATION
1. In misdemeanours of domestic violence the prosecutor competent for the exercise of criminal prosecution investigates the possibility of mediation according to the procedure of the following articles.
2. A precondition for the commencement of the penal mediation procedure is the submission of an unreserved declaration by the person to whom the commission of the crime is attributed, that he is willing cumulatively:
α) to promise that he will not commit in the future any act of domestic violence (word of honour) and that, in case of cohabitation, he agrees to stay outside the family home for a reasonable period of time, if the victim proposes it. For this promise a statement is drawn up according to articles 148 et seq. of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

β) to attend a special counselling - therapeutic programme for the confrontation of domestic violence in a public provider, in whatever place and for whatever period of time is deemed necessary by the competent therapists. The person responsible for the programme certifies the completion of attendance. The relevant certificate is attached to the case file. It states in detail the subject of the counselling - therapeutic programme and the number of sessions attended by the interested party.
γ) to remove or restore, if possible, immediately the consequences caused by the act and to pay reasonable monetary satisfaction to the injured party.

3. If the victim of domestic violence is a minor, the penal mediation is carried out on his behalf and jointly by the locally competent prosecutor for minors and the person exercising care, provided that the latter is not the same person as the alleged perpetrator of the crime. If there is no unanimity, mediation is not possible. The minor who has completed the fourteenth year of his age may, if he wishes, be present at it and be heard. The persons of the first sentence represent the minor in the penal mediation procedure also for civil claims.

4. The provisions of this law relating to penal mediation do not apply, if the alleged perpetrator of the act of domestic violence is the guardian, judicial assistant or foster parent of the minor.

5. If the act of domestic violence to the degree of a misdemeanour is alleged to have been committed by a minor, article 45A of the Code of Criminal Procedure applies.

Article 12

1. If proceedings under articles 417 et seq. of the Code of Criminal Procedure are initiated against the perpetrator, criminal mediation is permitted only if the court postpones the hearing of the case pursuant to the provisions of article 423 of the Code of Criminal Procedure. In this case, the relevant procedure takes place in accordance with paragraphs 3 to 6 of this article. The court that postpones the hearing of the case, under the first sentence, examines ex officio whether there is a case for imposing restrictive conditions on the perpetrator pursuant to article 18 of this law.

2. If a preliminary examination is conducted against the alleged perpetrator, the prosecutor, before any other action:

a) may order the conduct of a medical expert examination on the alleged victim, in order to investigate the validity of the complaint regarding the commission of the act against them,

b) examines himself every witness proposed, as well as the family members, or orders their examination by the competent investigating officers, and

c) summons the person to whom the commission of the act is attributed to provide explanations to him or to the competent investigating officer under the terms of article 31 paragraph 2 of the Code of Criminal Procedure.

3. If the person providing explanations does not submit himself, or through his lawyer, the declaration regarding criminal mediation under paragraph 2 of article 11, he is summoned to do so by the competent prosecutor. In this case he may be granted a time limit of three days to respond.

4. If the answer of the person providing explanations is negative or he does not respond, criminal proceedings are initiated pursuant to the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure. If the answer of the person providing explanations is positive, the prosecutor informs the injured party or his lawyer of the above declaration of the interested party and, if a relevant request is submitted, the injured party is granted a time limit of up to three days to declare whether he accepts the mediation.

5. If the answer of the injured party is negative or he does not respond or no agreement is reached regarding the terms of case a' of paragraph 2 of article 11, criminal proceedings are initiated pursuant to the provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure. If the answer of the injured party is positive, the prosecutor by his order places the case file in a special archive of the prosecutor's office. No appeal lies against this order.

6. If the persons to whom the commission of the act is attributed are more than one, agreement between them is required for the commencement of the criminal mediation procedure. The same applies if the alleged act concerns more than one victim. If no agreement is reached pursuant to the preceding sentences, mediation is not possible.

7. The agreement of the parties to the proceedings for the commencement of the criminal mediation procedure under paragraph 2 of article 11 of this law may be submitted to the competent prosecutor also by a relevant record by their lawyers.

Article 13

1. The order of the prosecutor issued following criminal mediation is recorded in a special entry in the criminal record certificate and is kept for a period equal to the statutory limitation period for the crime to which it relates.

2. If the interested party complies with the terms of the criminal mediation for a period of three years, then the relevant procedure is completed and the state's criminal claim for the crime concerned is extinguished.

3. The culpable non-completion of the criminal mediation as established by the prosecutor interrupts the procedure and causes the retroactive lifting of the effects that have occurred. In this case the prosecutor retrieves the case file from the archive, and the criminal proceedings continue pursuant to the relevant provisions of the Code of Criminal Procedure, without the submission of a new request for criminal mediation being permitted any longer.

4. While the criminal mediation procedure is ongoing, the act to which it relates is pending. The institution of criminal prosecution for an act for which the state's criminal claim has been extinguished due to completion of the criminal mediation procedure is inadmissible. The limitation period for the act is suspended until the completion of the criminal mediation procedure.

5. The refusal of one of the parties to the proceedings to accept mediation or the failure to complete it, for any reason whatsoever, does not entail any negative substantive or procedural consequence against them in the criminal trial that follows.

6. In paragraph 3 of article 574 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, item c' is added.

Article 14

1. The agreement of the parties for the commencement of the criminal mediation procedure is valid as a settlement regarding monetary claims arising from the crime of domestic violence. The agreement of the injured spouse alone for the commencement of the procedure does not prevent the filing of a divorce action or the submission of an application for consensual dissolution of the marriage, the progress of the trial and the dissolution of the marriage.

2. The non-compliance of the alleged perpetrator with the terms of the criminal mediation within three years from the archiving of the case gives the

victim of the crime of domestic violence the right to seek, by his action, the reversal of the agreement, as regards the monetary claims. With the filing of the action for reversal, the monetary claims of the injured party are revived, and the amounts paid by reason of the agreement are recoverable pursuant to the provisions on unjust enrichment.

3. After the completion of the criminal mediation, the reversal of the agreement is excluded, for any reason whatsoever, and the recovery of the amounts paid in compliance with it. The same effects are produced by the dissolution of the marriage between the spouses within the three-year period.

Article 15

CHAPTER E PROCEDURAL PROVISIONS

At the end of article 735 of the Code of Civil Procedure a sentence is added.

Article 16

If the acts of articles 6, 7 and 9 of this law are directed against a minor, the commencement of the limitation period is suspended until his coming of age.

Article 17

1. Criminal prosecution for the crimes of articles 6, 7, 9 and 10 is instituted ex officio.

2. Against the perpetrator the procedure of articles 417 et seq. of the Code of Criminal Procedure applies.

Article 18

1. In case of commission of a crime of domestic violence it is possible, if under the specific circumstances it is deemed necessary for the protection of the physical and mental health of the victim, to impose on the accused by the competent criminal court to which he is referred for trial or by the competent examining magistrate or by the judicial council and for as long as required, the restrictive condition of removal from the family home, his relocation, the prohibition to approach the victim's places of residence or work, residences of close relatives, children's educational establishments and shelters. The validity of the above restrictive condition ceases

automatically after the issuance of a final judgment or the order of the prosecutor by which the case is archived due to criminal mediation.

2. The restrictive condition that has been imposed in accordance with the provisions of the preceding paragraph may be revoked, replaced or modified by the competent judicial body that imposed it, upon application of the accused, in which the reasons for which the revocation, replacement or modification is required are stated. For the hearing of the application the injured party is summoned mandatorily, in accordance with the provisions in force from time to time.

3. The judicial body that is competent under paragraph 1 for the imposition, revocation, replacement or modification of the restrictive conditions may request, in an advisory capacity, the opinion of psychiatrists, psychologists, social workers and other scientists with special knowledge in matters of domestic violence, provided that these persons work in a public health body.

Article 19

1. In cases of domestic violence, family members are examined as witnesses without oath.

2. Minors during the trial of cases of the previous paragraph are not summoned as witnesses to the courtroom, but their testimony, if it exists, is read out, unless their examination is deemed necessary by the court.

Article 20

1. In case of commission of a crime of domestic violence, the competent police authorities conducting a preliminary investigation, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 2 of Article 243 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, are prohibited from disclosing in any way the name of the victim and the accused, their residential address, as well as any other information that may reveal their identity.

2. Violators of this provision are punished with imprisonment of up to two years.

Article 21

CHAPTER VI

ASSISTANCE TO VICTIMS

1. Victims of domestic violence are entitled to moral support and the necessary material assistance from legal entities of public or private law, which operate specifically for these purposes under the supervision of the Ministry of Health and Social Solidarity, and from social services of local government organizations.

2. Police authorities that handle, within the framework of their competences, cases of domestic violence are obliged, if the victim requests it, to inform the victim and the above entities, so that the necessary assistance, as the case may be, is provided immediately.

Article 22

Victims of domestic violence who seek the adoption of interim measures for temporary regulation of the situation, due to the specific incident, are granted the benefit of poverty with only the proof of the incident of violence, in accordance with the provisions of Articles 194 et seq. of the Code of Civil Procedure, if they are unable to pay, even temporarily, the required court costs.

Article 23

1. A teacher of primary or secondary education who, during the execution of his educational work, in any way learns or ascertains that a crime of domestic violence has been committed against a student, informs, without delay, the director of the school unit. The director of the school unit reports, immediately, the punishable act to the competent prosecutor, in accordance with the provisions of paragraph 1 of Article 37 of the Code of Criminal Procedure, or to the nearest police authority. The same obligation applies to teachers and directors of private schools, as well as to those responsible for all types of Preschool Education Units.
2. During the pre-trial and trial proceedings in the courtroom, the director of the school unit, who reported the punishable act to the above competent authorities, and the teacher, who learned or ascertained it, are called to be examined as witnesses, only if the information is not proven by any other means of evidence.

Article 24

Article 342 of the Penal Code (abuse of minors for indecency) is replaced.

Article 25

The time limits of paragraphs 1 and 2 of Article 3 and of Article 4 VI of Law 3388/2005, which were extended by joint ministerial decision No. 99583 oik./24.12.2005 (Official Gazette 1490 B') of the Ministers of Justice, Economy and Finance and Public Order, are extended respectively until the external guards are promoted to the rank of Deputy Guard and until 12.9.2007.

Article 26

Paragraph 4 of Article 49 of Law 2721/1999, as replaced by paragraph 2 of Article 1 of Law 3388/2005 and supplemented by Article 18 of Law 3472/2006, is replaced.

Article 27

The last sentence of paragraph 6 of Article 49 of Law 2721/1999 (Official Gazette 112 A'), as replaced by paragraph 2 of Article 1 of Law 3388/2005 (Official Gazette 225 A'), is replaced.

Article 28

The validity of this law begins three months after its publication in the Government Gazette.
