Skip to main content on this page

Skip to main content on this page

• Opinions and Feedback

• Related Sites

• English

Cabinet Office Gender Equality Bureau Gender Equality Bureau

Cabinet Office

Global Navigation Menu Menu

• About Gender Equality

• Main Policies

• Promotion Headquarters, Councils, etc.

• International Cooperation

• Public Relations and Press

• Basic Data

Enter search keyword

How to use search

Cabinet Office Home > Cabinet Office Gender Equality Bureau Home > About Gender Equality > Laws > Act on the Prevention of Spousal Violence and the Protection of Victims

Act on the Prevention of Spousal Violence and the Protection of Victims

Table of Contents

• Preamble

• Chapter I General Provisions (Articles 1 and 2)

• Chapter I-2 Basic Policy and Prefectural Basic Plans, etc. (Articles 2-2 and 2-3)

• Chapter II Spousal Violence Counseling and Support Centers, etc. (Articles 3 to 5)

• Chapter III Protection of Victims (Articles 6 to 9-2)

• Chapter IV Protection Orders (Articles 10 to 22)

• Chapter V Miscellaneous Provisions (Articles 23 to 28)

• Chapter V-2 Supplementary Provisions (Article 28-2)

• Chapter VI Penal Provisions (Articles 29 and 30)

• Supplementary Provisions

In our country, the Constitution of Japan proclaims respect for the individual and equality under the law, and efforts have been made toward the protection of human rights and the realization of gender equality.

However, despite the fact that spousal violence is a serious human rights violation that includes acts constituting crimes, relief for victims has not necessarily been sufficiently provided. Moreover, victims of spousal violence are in many cases women, and the infliction of violence by spouses on women who have difficulty achieving economic independence violates individual dignity and hinders the realization of gender equality.

In order to improve such circumstances and achieve the protection of human rights and the realization of gender equality, it is necessary to implement measures to prevent spousal violence and protect victims. This is also in line with efforts in the international community that are striving to eradicate violence against women.

Here, by establishing systems for reporting, counseling, protection, independence support, etc. related to spousal violence, this Act is enacted for the purpose of preventing spousal violence and protecting victims.

Chapter I General Provisions

(Definitions)

Article 1

In this Act, "spousal violence" means physical violence from a spouse (meaning unlawful attacks on the body that cause harm to life or body; the same shall apply hereinafter) or verbal or other conduct that causes harmful effects on mind and body equivalent thereto (hereinafter in this paragraph and

Article 28

-2, collectively referred to as "physical violence, etc."), and in cases where a person has divorced or had their marriage annulled after receiving physical violence, etc. from a spouse, includes physical violence, etc. continuously received from the person who was the spouse.

2

In this Act, "victim" means a person who has received spousal violence.

3

"Spouse" in this Act includes persons who, although not having submitted a marriage notification, are in circumstances similar to a marital relationship in fact, and "divorce" includes cases where persons who were in circumstances similar to a marital relationship in fact although not having submitted a marriage notification enter into circumstances similar to divorce in fact.

(Responsibilities of the State and Local Governments)

Article 2

The State and local governments have the responsibility to prevent spousal violence and to provide appropriate protection, including supporting the independence of victims.

Chapter I-2 Basic Policy and Prefectural Basic Plans, etc.

(Basic Policy)

Article 2

-2 The Prime Minister, the National Public Safety Commission, the Minister of Justice, and the Minister of Health, Labour and Welfare (hereinafter in this Article and paragraph 5 of the following Article referred to as "competent ministers") shall establish a basic policy concerning measures for the prevention of spousal violence and the protection of victims (hereinafter in this Article and paragraphs 1 and 3 of the following Article referred to as "Basic Policy").

2

In the Basic Policy, matters to serve as guidelines for prefectural basic plans under paragraph 1 of the following Article and municipal basic plans under paragraph 3 of the same Article shall be established with respect to the following matters:

Basic matters concerning the prevention of spousal violence and the protection of victims

Matters concerning the content of measures for the prevention of spousal violence and the protection of victims

Other important matters concerning the implementation of measures for the prevention of spousal violence and the protection of victims

3

When establishing or revising the Basic Policy, the competent ministers shall consult in advance with the heads of relevant administrative organs.

4

When the competent ministers have established or revised the Basic Policy, they shall publicize it without delay.

(Prefectural Basic Plans, etc.)

Article 2

-3 Prefectures shall, in accordance with the Basic Policy, establish a basic plan concerning the implementation of measures for the prevention of spousal violence and the protection of victims in the prefecture (hereinafter in this Article referred to as "prefectural basic plan").

2

In prefectural basic plans, the following matters shall be established:

Basic policies concerning the prevention of spousal violence and the protection of victims

Matters concerning the implementation content of measures for the prevention of spousal violence and the protection of victims

Other important matters concerning the implementation of measures for the prevention of spousal violence and the protection of victims

Municipalities (including special wards; the same shall apply hereinafter) shall endeavor to establish a basic plan concerning the implementation of measures for the prevention of spousal violence and the protection of victims in the municipality (hereinafter in this Article referred to as "municipal basic plan") in accordance with the Basic Policy and taking into consideration the prefectural basic plan.

When a prefecture or municipality has established or revised a prefectural basic plan or municipal basic plan, it shall publicize it without delay.

The competent ministers shall endeavor to provide necessary advice and other assistance for the preparation of prefectural basic plans or municipal basic plans to prefectures or municipalities.

Chapter II Spousal Violence Counseling and Support Centers, etc.

(Spousal Violence Counseling and Support Centers)

Article 3

Prefectures shall ensure that women's consulting offices and other appropriate facilities established by the prefecture fulfill functions as Spousal Violence Counseling and Support Centers.

Municipalities shall endeavor to ensure that appropriate facilities established by the municipality fulfill functions as Spousal Violence Counseling and Support Centers.

Spousal Violence Counseling and Support Centers shall perform the following services for the prevention of spousal violence and the protection of victims:

Responding to consultations concerning various problems related to victims or introducing women's counselors or consultation organizations

Providing medical or psychological guidance and other necessary guidance to restore the mental and physical health of victims

Ensuring the safety of victims in emergencies and providing temporary protection (in cases where victims are accompanied by their families, for victims and their accompanying families; the same shall apply in the following item, item 6,

Article 5, Article 8-3 and Article 9)

Four

In order to promote victims' independent living, providing information, advice, coordination with relevant organizations, and other assistance concerning employment promotion, securing housing, use of support systems, etc.

Five

Providing information, advice, contact with relevant organizations, and other assistance concerning the use of the protection order system provided in

Chapter IV

Six

Providing information, advice, coordination with relevant organizations, and other assistance concerning the use of facilities that house and protect victims

4

Temporary protection under item 3 of the preceding paragraph shall be conducted by women's consulting offices themselves or by commissioning persons who meet standards established by the Minister of Health, Labour and Welfare.

5

In performing their services, Spousal Violence Counseling and Support Centers shall endeavor to cooperate with private organizations that conduct activities for the prevention of spousal violence and the protection of victims, as necessary.

(Counseling, etc. by Women's Counselors)

Article 4

Women's counselors may respond to consultations by victims and provide necessary guidance.

(Protection at Women's Protection Facilities)

Article 5

Prefectures may provide protection for victims at women's protection facilities.

Chapter III Protection of Victims

(Reporting, etc. by Persons Who Discover Spousal Violence)

Article 6

Persons who discover persons receiving spousal violence (limited to physical violence from a spouse or person who was a spouse; the same shall apply hereinafter in this Chapter) shall endeavor to report that fact to a Spousal Violence Counseling and Support Center or police officer.

2

When physicians and other medical personnel, in the course of performing their duties, discover persons who are injured or have contracted illness as a result of spousal violence, they may report that fact to a Spousal Violence Counseling and Support Center or police officer. In this case, they shall endeavor to respect the person's intentions.

Provisions concerning the crime of divulging secrets under the Penal Code (Act No. 45 of 1907) and other provisions of laws concerning confidentiality obligations shall not be construed as preventing reporting pursuant to the provisions of the preceding two paragraphs.

When physicians and other medical personnel, in the course of performing their duties, discover persons who are injured or have contracted illness as a result of spousal violence, they shall endeavor to provide such persons with information they possess concerning the use of Spousal Violence Counseling and Support Centers, etc.

(Explanation, etc. Concerning Protection by Spousal Violence Counseling and Support Centers)

Article 7

When a Spousal Violence Counseling and Support Center receives a report or consultation concerning a victim, it shall, as necessary, provide the victim with explanation and advice concerning the content of services performed by Spousal Violence Counseling and Support Centers pursuant to the provisions of

Article 3, paragraph 3, and recommend that the victim receive necessary protection.

(Prevention of Harm by Police Officers)

Article 8

When police officers recognize through reports, etc. that spousal violence is being committed, they shall endeavor to take necessary measures to prevent the occurrence of harm from spousal violence, such as stopping the violence and protecting victims, in accordance with the provisions of the Police Act (Act No. 162 of 1954), the Police Duties Execution Act (Act No. 136 of 1948), and other laws and regulations.

(Assistance by Superintendents General of Metropolitan/Prefectural Police Headquarters, etc.)

Article 8

-2 The Superintendent General of the Metropolitan Police Department or the superintendent general of a prefectural police headquarters (for districts other than the district encompassing the location of the prefectural police headquarters, the district superintendent general;

Article 15

, paragraph 3, the same shall apply) or a police station chief shall, when a person receiving spousal violence applies for assistance to prevent harm from spousal violence by themselves and the application is deemed reasonable, provide such person receiving spousal violence with instruction on measures to prevent such harm by themselves and other necessary assistance to prevent the occurrence of harm from spousal violence, as provided by National Public Safety Commission Rules.

(Independence Support by Welfare Offices)

Article 8

-3 Welfare offices concerning welfare as provided in the Social Welfare Act (Act No. 45 of 1951) (referred to as "welfare offices" in the following Article) shall endeavor to take necessary measures to support the independence of victims in accordance with the provisions of the Public Assistance Act (Act No. 144 of 1950), the Child Welfare Act (Act No. 164 of 1947), the Act on Welfare of Mothers and Fathers and Widows (Act No. 129 of 1964), and other laws and regulations.

(Cooperation and Coordination Among Relevant Organizations for the Protection of Victims)

Article 9

Spousal Violence Counseling and Support Centers, prefectural police, welfare offices, child guidance centers, and other relevant organizations of prefectures or municipalities and other relevant organizations shall endeavor to cooperate with each other while coordinating mutually so that appropriate protection is provided in protecting victims.

(Appropriate and Prompt Handling of Complaints)

Article 9

-2 When the relevant organizations under the preceding Article receive a complaint from a victim concerning the execution of duties by personnel involved in the protection of victims, they shall endeavor to handle it appropriately and promptly.

Chapter IV Protection Orders

(Protection Orders)

Article 10

When a victim (limited to persons who have received physical violence from a spouse or threats against life, etc. (meaning threats made by announcing the intent to inflict harm on the victim's life or body; the same shall apply hereinafter in this Chapter); the same shall apply hereinafter in this Chapter) is a person who has received physical violence from a spouse and there is a large risk of receiving serious harm to their life or body from further physical violence from the spouse (in cases where the victim has divorced or had their marriage annulled after receiving physical violence from the spouse, physical violence continuously received from the person who was the spouse;

Article 12

, paragraph 1, item 2, the same shall apply), or is a person who has received threats against life, etc. from a spouse and there is a large risk of receiving serious harm to their life or body from physical violence received from the spouse (in cases where the victim has divorced or had their marriage annulled after receiving threats against life, etc. from the spouse, physical violence continuously received from the person who was the spouse; the same shall apply in the same item), the court shall, upon application by the victim, order the spouse (in cases where the victim has divorced or had their marriage annulled after receiving physical violence or threats against life, etc. from the spouse, the person who was the spouse;

the same shall apply hereinafter in this Article, items 3 and 4 of the same paragraph, and

Article 18

, paragraph 1) to comply with the matters listed in the following items, in order to prevent harm from being inflicted on their life or body; provided, however, that matters listed in item 2 shall be limited to cases where the victim and the spouse share a residence at the time of application:

For a period of six months from the day on which the order takes effect, not to loiter around the victim's person at the victim's residence (excluding residences that serve as a shared residence with the spouse; the same shall apply hereinafter in this item) or other places, or to loiter in the vicinity of the victim's residence, workplace, or other places where the victim is normally present

For a period of two months from the day on which the order takes effect, to leave the residence that serves as a shared residence with the victim and not to loiter in the vicinity of such residence

In cases provided in the main clause of the preceding paragraph, the court that issues or has issued an order pursuant to the provisions of item 1 of the same paragraph shall, upon application by the victim, order the spouse not to commit any of the acts listed in the following items against the victim during the period from the day on which the order takes effect until the day on which six months have elapsed from the day on which the order pursuant to the provisions of the same item took effect, in order to prevent harm from being inflicted on their life or body:

Demanding a meeting

Two

Informing of matters that would make the victim think their conduct is being monitored, or placing such matters in a state where they can be known

Engaging in extremely crude or violent speech or conduct

Making telephone calls without saying anything, or except in cases of urgent necessity, continuously making telephone calls, transmitting by facsimile device, or sending electronic mail

Except in cases of urgent necessity, making telephone calls, transmitting by facsimile device, or sending electronic mail between 10:00 p.m. and 6:00 a.m.

Sending or placing in a state where they can be known filth, animal carcasses, or other objects that cause extreme displeasure or disgust

Informing of matters that harm their honor, or placing such matters in a state where they can be known

Informing of matters that harm their sense of sexual shame or placing such matters in a state where they can be known, or sending or placing in a state where they can be known documents, drawings, or other objects that harm their sense of sexual shame

In cases provided in the main clause of paragraph 1, when a victim is living together with a child who has not reached the age of majority (hereinafter in this paragraph and the following paragraph and

Article 12

, paragraph 1, item 3, simply referred to as "child"), and when it is recognized as necessary to prevent the victim from being compelled to meet with the spouse in relation to the child living together with them because the spouse is engaging in speech or conduct that gives rise to suspicion that they will take back a young child or due to other circumstances, the court that issues or has issued an order pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 1, item 1 shall, upon application by the victim, order the spouse not to loiter around the child's person at the child's residence (excluding residences that serve as a shared residence with the spouse; the same shall apply hereinafter in this paragraph), school attended, or other places, or to loiter in the vicinity of the child's residence, school attended, or other places where the child is normally present, during the period from the day on which the order takes effect until the day on which six months have elapsed from the day on which the order pursuant to the provisions of the same item took effect, in order to prevent harm from being inflicted on their life or body; provided, however, that when the child is fifteen years of age or older, this shall be limited to cases where there is consent.

In cases provided in the main clause of paragraph 1, when it is recognized as necessary to prevent the victim from being compelled to meet with the spouse in relation to relatives of the victim or other persons who have a close relationship with the victim in social life (excluding children living together with the victim and persons living together with the spouse; hereinafter in this paragraph and the following paragraph and

Article 12

, paragraph 1, item 4, referred to as "relatives, etc.") because the spouse is pushing into the residence of the relatives, etc. and engaging in extremely crude or violent speech or conduct or due to other circumstances, the court that issues or has issued an order pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 1, item 1 shall, upon application by the victim, order the spouse not to loiter around the person of the relatives, etc. at the residence of the relatives, etc. (excluding residences that serve as a shared residence with the spouse; the same shall apply hereinafter in this paragraph) or other places, or to loiter in the vicinity of the residence of the relatives, etc., their workplace, or other places where they are normally present, during the period from the day on which the order takes effect until the day on which six months have elapsed from the day on which the order pursuant to the provisions of the same item took effect, in order to prevent harm from being inflicted on their life or body.

An application under the preceding paragraph may be made only when there is consent of the relatives, etc. (excluding children of the victim under fifteen years of age; the same shall apply hereinafter in this paragraph) (in cases where the relatives, etc. are persons under fifteen years of age or adult wards, consent of their legal representatives).

(Court with Jurisdiction)

Article 11

Cases concerning applications for orders pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 1 of the preceding Article shall fall under the jurisdiction of the district court having jurisdiction over the location of the domicile of the other party (or residence when there is no domicile in Japan or the domicile is unknown).

Applications for orders pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 1 of the preceding Article may also be made to district courts having jurisdiction over the places listed in the following items:

The location of the domicile or residence of the applicant

Two

The place where physical violence or threats against life, etc. from the spouse pertaining to the application were committed

(Application for Protection Orders)

Article 12 An application for an order pursuant to the provisions of Article 10, paragraphs 1 through 4 (hereinafter referred to as a "protection order") must be made in writing stating the following matters:

The circumstances under which physical violence or threats to life, etc. were received from a spouse

The circumstances at the time of application sufficient to recognize that there is a substantial risk of serious harm to life or body due to further physical violence from the spouse or physical violence to be received from the spouse after receiving threats to life, etc. from the spouse

Article 10

In the case of making an application for an order pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 3, the circumstances at the time of application sufficient to recognize that it is necessary to issue the order in order to prevent the victim from being compelled to meet with the spouse in relation to the child living together

Article 10

In the case of making an application for an order pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 4, the circumstances at the time of application sufficient to recognize that it is necessary to issue the order in order to prevent the victim from being compelled to meet with the spouse in relation to the relative, etc.

The presence or absence of the fact that consultation was sought or assistance or protection was requested from an employee of a spousal violence counseling and support center or a police employee regarding the matters listed in the preceding items, and when such fact exists, the following matters:

ro

The date, time and place when consultation was sought or assistance or protection was requested

The content of the consultation or the assistance or protection requested

The content of the measures taken in response to the consultation or the applicant's request

Where the document set forth in the preceding paragraph (hereinafter referred to as the "application form") does not contain a statement of the matters listed in item 5, (i) through (ni) of the same paragraph, the application form must be accompanied by a document stating the applicant's statement regarding the matters listed in items 1 through 4 of the same paragraph and certified pursuant to the Notary Public Act (Act No. 53 of 1908)

Article 58-2, paragraph 1.

(Expeditious Trial)

Article 13 The court shall render a judgment expeditiously in cases relating to applications for protection orders.

(Method of Hearing of Protection Order Cases)

Article 14

A protection order may not be issued without going through an oral argument or a hearing date at which the other party may be present. However, this shall not apply when there are circumstances under which the purpose of the application for a protection order cannot be achieved by going through such date.

2

Where the application form contains a statement of the matters listed in

Article 12,

paragraph 1, item 5, (i) through (ni), the court shall request the spousal violence counseling and support center or the head of the relevant government office to submit a document stating the circumstances when the applicant sought consultation or requested assistance or protection and the content of the measures taken in response thereto. In this case, the spousal violence counseling and support center or the head of the relevant government office shall promptly comply with such request.

3

When the court finds it necessary, it may request further explanation from the head of the spousal violence counseling and support center or government office set forth in the preceding paragraph, or from the employee who received the consultation or was requested to provide assistance or protection by the applicant, regarding the matters for which submission of a document was requested pursuant to the provisions of the same paragraph.

(Decision, etc. on Application for Protection Order)

Article 15 A decision on an application for a protection order must be accompanied by reasons. However, when making a decision without going through oral argument, it shall be sufficient to indicate the gist of the reasons.

2

A protection order shall take effect upon service of the written decision on the other party or pronouncement at an oral argument or hearing date at which the other party appeared.

3

When a protection order has been issued, the court clerk shall promptly notify the Superintendent General of the Tokyo Metropolitan Police or the prefectural police headquarters chief having jurisdiction over the applicant's domicile or residence of that fact and the content thereof.

4

When a protection order has been issued and there is a fact that the applicant sought consultation from or requested assistance or protection from an employee of a spousal violence counseling and support center, and the application form contains a statement of the matters listed in

Article 12,

paragraph 1, item 5, (i) through (ni) relating to such fact, the court clerk shall promptly notify the head of the spousal violence counseling and support center whose name is stated in the application form (or, where two or more spousal violence counseling and support centers are named in the application form, the spousal violence counseling and support center with the latest date and time when the applicant sought consultation from or requested assistance or protection from its employee) of the fact that a protection order has been issued and the content thereof.

A protection order shall have no executory force.

(Immediate Appeal)

Article 16 An immediate appeal may be filed against a ruling on an application for a protection order.

2

An immediate appeal under the preceding paragraph shall not affect the validity of a protection order.

3

Where an immediate appeal has been filed, only when prima facie evidence has been presented that there are circumstances that clearly constitute grounds for revoking the protection order, the appellate court may, upon application, order suspension of the effect of the protection order until the ruling on the immediate appeal takes effect. While the case record is in the original court, the original court may also order such disposition.

4

When ordering suspension of the effect of an order pursuant to the provisions of

Article 10,

paragraph 1, item 1 pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph, if an order pursuant to the provisions of paragraphs 2 through 4 of the same Article has been issued, the court must also order suspension of the effect of such order.

5

No appeal may be filed against a ruling pursuant to the provisions of the preceding two paragraphs.

6

When the appellate court revokes an order pursuant to the provisions of

Article 10,

paragraph 1, item 1, if an order pursuant to the provisions of paragraphs 2 through 4 of the same Article has been issued, the appellate court must also revoke such order.

7

With respect to a protection order for which notification pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 4 of the preceding Article has been made, when suspension of its effect has been ordered pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 3 or paragraph 4, or when the appellate court has revoked it, the court clerk shall promptly notify the head of the spousal violence counseling and support center to which such notification was made of that fact and the content thereof.

8

The provisions of paragraph 3 of the preceding Article shall apply mutatis mutandis to the cases under paragraphs 3 and 4 and to the case where the appellate court has revoked a protection order.

(Revocation of Protection Order)

Article 17

The court that issued a protection order must revoke the protection order when an application has been made by the person who applied for the protection order.

Article 10

In the case of an order pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 1, item 1 or paragraphs 2 through 4, after three months have elapsed from the date on which the order pursuant to the provisions of the same item took effect, and in the case of an order pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 1, item 2 of the same Article, after two weeks have elapsed from the date on which the order took effect, when the person who received these orders applies and the court confirms that the person who applied for these orders has no objection, the same shall apply.

The provisions of paragraph 6 of the preceding Article shall apply mutatis mutandis to the case where the court that issued an order pursuant to the provisions of

Article 10, paragraph 1, item 1 revokes the order pursuant to the provisions of the preceding paragraph.

3

The provisions of Article 15, paragraph 3 and paragraph 7 of the preceding Article shall apply mutatis mutandis to the cases under the preceding two paragraphs. (Renewed Application for Order Pursuant to the Provisions of Article 10, Paragraph 1, Item 2)

Article 18

Article 10

When a renewed application for an order pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 1, item 2 has been made based on the same facts as the physical violence or threats to life, etc. that constituted the grounds for the application for the order that was issued, after an order pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 1, item 2 has been issued, the court shall issue the order only when it finds that there are circumstances that should be recognized as necessitating the issuance of an order pursuant to the provisions of the same item again, such as the victim who intends to move from the residence that serves as the base of living together with the spouse being unable to complete the move from the residence by the date on which two months have elapsed from the date on which the effect of the issued order arose, due to circumstances not attributable to the victim. However, when it is found that issuing the order would cause particularly significant hindrance to the life of the spouse, the order may not be issued.

2

With respect to the application of the provisions of

Article 12

when making an application under the preceding paragraph, in the portion of paragraph 1 of the same Article other than the list of items, "the following matters" shall be deemed to be replaced with "the matters listed in items 1, 2 and 5 and the circumstances under

Article 18,

paragraph 1, main clause"; in item 5 of the same paragraph, "the matters listed in the preceding items" shall be deemed to be replaced with "the matters listed in items 1 and 2 and the circumstances under

Article 18,

paragraph 1, main clause"; and in paragraph 2 of the same Article, "the matters listed in items 1 through 4 of the same paragraph" shall be deemed to be replaced with "the matters listed in items 1 and 2 of the same paragraph and the circumstances under

Article 18, paragraph 1, main clause."

(Inspection, etc. of Case Records)

Article 19

With respect to procedures relating to protection orders, a party may request the court clerk to inspect or copy the case record, or to issue an original, certified copy or extract thereof, or to issue a certificate of matters relating to the case. However, with respect to the other party, this shall not apply until an oral argument or a hearing date to summon the other party has been designated in relation to the application for a protection order, or until service of the protection order on the other party has been made.

(Authentication of Oath by Legal Affairs Official)

Article 20

When there is no notary public within the jurisdictional district of a legal affairs bureau or district legal affairs bureau or its branch office, or when a notary public is unable to perform his or her duties, the Minister of Justice may have a legal affairs official working at the legal affairs bureau or district legal affairs bureau or its branch office perform the authentication under

Article 12, paragraph 2 (including cases where it is applied with replacement pursuant to the provisions of Article 18, paragraph 2).

(Application Mutatis Mutandis of the Code of Civil Procedure)

Article 21

Except where otherwise specifically provided in this Act, the provisions of the Code of Civil Procedure (Act No. 109 of 1996) shall apply mutatis mutandis to procedures relating to protection orders, to the extent not contrary to the nature thereof.

(Supreme Court Rules)

Article 22 In addition to what is provided in this Act, matters necessary for procedures relating to protection orders shall be prescribed by Rules of the Supreme Court.

Chapter V Miscellaneous Provisions

(Consideration, etc. by Persons Related to Duties)

Article 23

Persons related to duties in the protection, investigation, trial, etc. of victims of violence from spouses (referred to as "persons related to duties" in the following paragraph) shall, in performing their duties, respect the human rights of victims regardless of their nationality, presence or absence of disabilities, etc., and give full consideration to ensuring their safety and maintaining confidentiality, based on the physical and mental condition of the victims and the environment in which they are placed.

2

The national and local governments shall provide necessary training and awareness-raising for persons related to duties in order to deepen their understanding of the human rights of victims, the characteristics of violence from spouses, etc.

(Education and Awareness-Raising)

Article 24 The national and local governments shall endeavor to provide education and awareness-raising to deepen the understanding of the people regarding the prevention of violence from spouses.

(Promotion of Research, etc.)

Article 25

The national and local governments shall endeavor to promote research on methods of guidance for the rehabilitation of perpetrators, methods for restoring the physical and mental health of victims, etc., and to train personnel involved in the protection of victims and improve their qualities, in order to contribute to the prevention of violence from spouses and the protection of victims.

(Assistance to Private Organizations)

Article 26 The national and local governments shall endeavor to provide necessary assistance to private organizations that conduct activities for the prevention of violence from spouses and the protection of victims.

(Expenditures by Prefectures and Cities)

Article 27 Prefectures shall defray the following expenses:

Expenses required for the operation of women's consultation centers that perform the services listed in

Article 3, paragraph 3 based on the provisions of the same paragraph (excluding expenses listed in the following item)

Article 3

Expenses required for temporary protection performed by women's consultation centers based on the provisions of paragraph 3, item 3 (including cases where it is performed by entrustment to persons who meet the standards established by the Minister of Health, Labour and Welfare as prescribed in paragraph 4 of the same Article)

Expenses required for services performed by women's counselors commissioned by the prefectural governor based on the provisions of

Article 4 four

Expenses required for protection performed by prefectures based on the provisions of

Article 5 (including cases where it is performed by entrustment to municipalities, social welfare corporations or other persons deemed appropriate) and necessary administrative work accompanying such protection

A city shall defray expenses required for services performed by women's counselors commissioned by its mayor based on the provisions of

Article 4.

(National Burden and Subsidy)

Article 28

The national government shall, as provided by Cabinet Order, bear five-tenths of the expenses defrayed by prefectures pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 1 of the preceding Article, among those listed in items 1 and 2 of the same paragraph.

The national government may, within the limits of the budget, subsidize up to five-tenths of the expenses listed in the following items:

Among the expenses defrayed by prefectures pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 1 of the preceding Article, those listed in items 3 and 4 of the same paragraph

Expenses defrayed by cities pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 2 of the preceding Article

Chapter V-2 Supplementary Provisions

(Application Mutatis Mutandis of this Act)

Article 28

-2

Article 2

and the provisions from

Chapter I-2

through the preceding Chapter shall apply mutatis mutandis to violence from a partner in a relationship of cohabitation sharing a base of living (excluding those not leading a communal life similar to communal life in a marital relationship) (meaning physical violence, etc. from a partner in such relationship, and in cases where the person has dissolved the relationship after receiving physical violence, etc. from a partner in such relationship, including physical violence, etc. continuously received from the person who was in such relationship) and persons who have received such violence. In this case, in these provisions, "violence from a spouse" shall be deemed to be replaced with "violence from a partner in a relationship prescribed in

Article 28

-2," and in addition, the terms listed in the middle column of the table below in the provisions listed in the left column of the table shall be deemed to be replaced with the terms listed in the right column of the same table, respectively.

Article 2 Victim Victim (meaning a person who has received violence from a partner in a relationship prescribed in Article 28-2; the same shall apply hereinafter)

Article 6, paragraph 1 Spouse or former spouse Partner in a relationship prescribed in the same Article or former partner in a relationship prescribed in the same Article

Article 10

paragraphs 1 through 4,

Article 11, paragraph 2, item 2, Article 12, paragraph 1, items 1 through 4, and Article 18, paragraph 1 Spouse Partner in a relationship prescribed in Article 28-2

Article 10, paragraph 1 In cases of divorce or annulment of marriage In cases of dissolution of a relationship prescribed in Article 28-2

Chapter VI Penal Provisions

Article 29

A person who violates a protection order (including those pursuant to the provisions of

Article 10, paragraphs 1 through 4 as applied with replacement in the preceding Article; the same shall apply in the following Article) shall be punished by imprisonment with work for not more than one year or a fine of not more than one million yen.

Article 30

Article 12

A person who applies for a protection order with an application form containing false statements regarding matters to be stated pursuant to the provisions of paragraph 1 (including cases where it is applied with replacement pursuant to the provisions of

Article 18,

paragraph 2) or

Article 28

-2 as applied mutatis mutandis in

Article 12,

paragraph 1 (including cases where it is applied with replacement pursuant to the provisions of

Article 28

-2 as applied mutatis mutandis in

Article 18,

paragraph 2) shall be punished by a non-penal fine of not more than one hundred thousand yen.

Supplementary Provisions [Excerpt]

(Effective Date)

Article 1

This Act shall come into force on the date on which six months have elapsed from the date of promulgation. However, the provisions of

Chapter II,

Article 6

(limited to the part relating to spousal violence counseling and support centers),

Article 7, Article 9 (limited to the part relating to spousal violence counseling and support centers), Article 27 and Article 28 shall come into force on April 1, 2002.

(Transitional Measures)

Article 2

With respect to cases relating to applications for protection orders from victims who sought consultation from or requested assistance or protection from women's consultation centers regarding physical violence from spouses by March 31, 2002, the provisions of

Article 12,

paragraph 1, item 4 and

Article 14, paragraphs 2 and 3 shall be applied by deeming "spousal violence counseling and support center" in these provisions to be "women's consultation center."

(Review)

Article 3

The provisions of this Act shall be reviewed within three years after the enforcement of this Act, taking into account the state of enforcement of this Act, etc., and necessary measures shall be taken based on the results thereof.

Supplementary Provisions [Act No. 64 of 2004]

(Effective Date)

Article 1 This Act shall come into force on the date on which six months have elapsed from the date of promulgation.

(Transitional Measures)

Article 2

Cases relating to orders pursuant to the provisions of

Article 10 of the Act on the Prevention of Spousal Violence and the Protection of Victims prior to amendment by this Act (referred to as the "Old Act" in the following paragraph) for applications for orders pursuant to the provisions of Article 10 of the Old Act made prior to the enforcement of this Act shall remain subject to the provisions then in force.

2

When an application for an order pursuant to the provisions of

Article 10,

paragraph 1, item 2 of the Act on the Prevention of Spousal Violence and the Protection of Victims after amendment by this Act (hereinafter referred to as the "New Act") has been made (limited to the first application made after the enforcement of this Act) based on the same facts as the unlawful attack on the body that endangered life or body that constituted the grounds for the application for an order pursuant to the provisions of item 2 of

Article 10

of the Old Act after an order pursuant to the provisions of item 2 of

Article 10

of the Old Act has been issued, the provisions of

Article 18, paragraph 1 of the New Act shall be applied by deeming "two months" in the same paragraph to be "two weeks."

(Review)

Article 3

The provisions of the New Act shall be reviewed within three years after the enforcement of this Act, taking into account the state of enforcement of the New Act, etc., and necessary measures shall be taken based on the results thereof.

Supplementary Provisions [Act No. 113 of 2007] [Excerpt]

(Effective Date)

Article 1 This Act shall come into force on the date on which six months have elapsed from the date of promulgation.

(Transitional Measures)

Article 2

Cases relating to orders pursuant to the provisions of

Article 10 of the Act on the Prevention of Spousal Violence and the Protection of Victims prior to amendment by this Act for applications for orders pursuant to the provisions of Article 10 of the Act on the Prevention of Spousal Violence and the Protection of Victims prior to amendment by this Act made prior to the enforcement of this Act shall remain subject to the provisions then in force.

Supplementary Provisions [Act No. 72 of 2013] [Excerpt]

(Effective Date)

1 This Act shall come into force on the date on which six months have elapsed from the date of promulgation.

Supplementary Provisions [Act No. 28 of 2014] [Excerpt]

(Effective Date)

Article 1 This Act shall come into force on April 1, 2015. However, the provisions listed in the following items shall come into force on the dates specified in the respective items:

— Omitted

2

The provisions of

Article 2 and Articles 3, 7 through 10, 12 and 15 through 18 of the Supplementary Provisions October 1, 2014

Supplementary Provisions [Act No. 46 of 2019] [Excerpt]

(Effective Date)

Article 1 This Act shall come into force on April 1, 2020. However, the provisions listed in the following items shall come into force on the dates specified in the respective items:

1 The provisions of

Article 4, Article 7, paragraph 1 and Article 8 of the Supplementary Provisions The date of promulgation

(Delegation to Cabinet Order of Other Transitional Measures)

Article 4 In addition to what is provided for in the preceding two articles, necessary transitional measures associated with the enforcement of this Act shall be prescribed by Cabinet Order.

(Review, etc.)

Article 8

The Government shall, within three years after the enforcement of the provisions set forth in Supplementary Provisions

Article 1

item (i), review the expansion of the forms of violence from a spouse prescribed in Article 6, paragraph (1) of the Act on the Prevention of Spousal Violence and the Protection of Victims, which are subject to notification under Article 6, paragraphs (1) and (2) of said Act, as well as the scope of victims prescribed in Article 10, paragraph (1) of said Act who may file a petition for an order under the provisions of Article 10, paragraphs (1) through (4) of said Act,

and take necessary measures based on the results thereof.

2 The Government shall, within three years after the enforcement of the provisions set forth in Supplementary Provisions

Article 1

item (i), review the state of guidance and support in the community for the rehabilitation of perpetrators of violence from a spouse prescribed in Article 1, paragraph (1) of the Act on the Prevention of Spousal Violence and the Protection of Victims, as set forth in Supplementary Provisions

Article 1

paragraph (1), and take necessary measures based on the results thereof.

このページの先頭へ

男女共同参画とは

「男女共同参画社会」って何だろう？

法律

基本計画

男女共同参画に関する予算

男女共同参画白書

成果目標・指標

シンボルマーク

用語集

主な政策

女性活躍推進法

女性の活躍状況の「見える化」

ポジティブ・アクション

仕事と生活の調和（ワーク・ライフ・バランス）

女性に対する暴力の根絶

男性にとっての男女共同参画

地方との連携

災害対応

推進本部・会議等

男女共同参画推進本部

男女共同参画会議

専門調査会

検討会

男女共同参画推進連携会議

国際的協調

国際規範・基準

国際会議

国連機関

諸外国との協力関係等

広報・報道

広報誌「共同参画」 メールマガジン 報道発表資料 フォトギャラリー パンフレット・リーフレット ビデオ・DVD キャンペーン イベント・シンポジウム 表彰 夫婦が本音で話せる魔法のシート「○○家作戦会議」 男性の家事・育児参画コンセプトポスター

基本データ

調査研究等 世論調査 成果目標・指標 女性の活躍状況の「見える化」 国際関係データ その他

• アクセシビリティ • サイトマップ • このホームページについて • プライバシーポリシー • アクセス

内閣府男女共同参画局 Gender Equality Bureau Cabinet Office 100-8914 東京都千代田区永田 町1-6-1 電話番号 03-5253-2111（大代表） 法人番号：2000012010019

Copyright 2016 Gender Equality Bureau Cabinet Office.
