Lao People's Democratic Republic

Lao People's Democratic Republic
Peace Independence Democracy Unity Prosperity
Prime Minister's Office	No. 26 /PMO
Vientiane 6 February 2006

DECREE
On the Implementation of the Law on Development And Protection of Women
Pursuant to the Law on the Government of the Lao PDR No. 02/NA dated 6 May 2003;	In accordance with the Law on Development and Protection of Women No.
08/NA dated 22 October 2004;
Upon the request of the President of the Lao Women's Union No 427/LWU dated 23 November 2005
Prime Minister Decrees: Part I
General Provisions

Article 1: Objectives

The issuance of this Decree is to implement the Law on Development and Protection of Women, aiming to make its implementation strict, unanimous, extensive and more effective throughout the country.

Article 2: Definitions of terms

The terms used in this Decree have the following meanings:
Children are boys and girls under 18 years old.
Discrimination against women is all forms of distinction, exclusion or restriction on women made on the basis of sex which has the effect of nullifying the recognition by the society of their right uses, of equality of men and women, of human rights, of freedom in the political, economical, cultural and social or any other fields.
Good quality of life is conditions of good living of individuals in the society, consisting of 2 fundamental factors: living well and eating well.

o	Living well is a living in a good environment, with sufficient materials to guarantee conveniences in living, without pressure from outside such as: physical, mental, pollution.

o	Eating well means having meals full of vitamins and nutrients useful for body as per setting in the principles of nutrition.

Besides those two above factors, good quality of life also means having jobs, education and other basic rights as stipulated in the Constitution and Laws.
Good mental health refers to mental strengths, pleasant mood without stress and sickness.
Cultural family is a family that achieves standards of cultural family set by the government periodically.
Social worker is a person who provides assistance to victimized people through education, counseling and other social assistances aiming at relieving their affections.
Victim is targeted person or victimized person from trafficking in persons.
Victimized person is a person who experiences losses in life, health, mentality, dignity or assets from trafficking in persons or from domestic violence.	Severe violence is an action or negligence that has impacts on or causes great losses in life, health, freedom, mentality, dignity or assets such as: death, invalidity, injury, HIV/AIDS infection, madness, psycho-mental disturbances due to beating, torture, oppression, detention and other actions as stipulated in Article 24, 30, 31 and 32 of the Law on Development and Protection of Women.
Minor violence is an action or negligence that has minor impacts and losses such as: insults, ridicules and prevention from undertaking activities such as social activities.
Counseling refers to provision of assistance to women and children by giving ideas, advising on a particular matter in order to help them have alternatives and make correct decision in the settlement of problems occurring in their life by themselves.	Defender is a person taking part in the proceeding of case to protect legitimate rights and benefits of the victim such as: lawyer, representative of organization, husband or wife, parents, guardian or close relative.
Removal of body's organs means cutting any organs such as: kidneys, eyes from the body or modification of shape. The voluntary removal, transplanting and modification of body's organs for beauty purpose or following an accident are not regarded as a crime of trafficking in persons especially in trafficking in women and children.

Part II Development of Women

Article 3: Physical development

In enabling women to have healthy physical growth, strong health, intelligence, good quality of life and long life expectation, the government, society and families shall provide counsels, basic health care education, nutrition, creation of favorable conditions and shall encourage their broad access to health services such as: medical checkups as scheduled, vaccination as specified in regulations, medical treatments and rest when getting sick, delivering, miscarrying, their access to sports and exercises, their consumption of food useful for body and their living in a good environment.

Article 4: Responsibilities of Public Health Sector

Public Health Sector has a duty to translate the Law on Development and Protection of Women relating to health issues into detailed regulations, action plans, projects, measures to promote physical development, health of women and children as well as to supervise, encourage and monitor its implementation.

Article 5: Mental development

In the mental development, the state, society shall educate women on policy, ideology of the Party, revolutionary virtues and morals, upgrade their level of political theory, enhance their hardworking traditions and good culture, create conditions for them to have access to modern civilization, to have pleasant mood, families full of concord, happiness and progress.

Article 6

Responsibilities of Information and Culture Sector and the Lao Women's Union
Information and Culture Sector and the Lao Women's Union have a duty to translate the Law on Development and Protection of Women relating to their sectors into detailed regulations, action plans, projects, measures to promote mental development of women and children as well as to supervise, encourage and monitor its implementation.

Article 7: Educational development

Family shall create conditions for their daughters to have equal education as for their sons without any discrimination. Local administrative authorities shall encourage and promote more widespread enrolment by women in different schools including general and vocational education.

Article 8: Responsibilities of Education Sector

Education Sector shall guarantee that women have the same opportunities as men in general, high, technical and vocational education, vocational training and continuous education, choices of fields of studies, scholarships and non-paid education; shall promote systems of education reflecting equality between women and men, including teaching curriculum, student books and other educational materials; shall modify traditional practices and socio-cultural beliefs that hinder educational development of women as well as their rights to education; shall respond to specific needs of targeted women, to whom special attention shall be paid, including appropriate measures to reduce the rates of illiteracy or to provide formal and non-formal education to women.

Article 9: Vocational and work skill development

The state, society shall expand vocational schools, train work skills including work ethics, encourage, promote women to gain more and more jobs in all fields in state and private sectors including procure them domestic and international labor markets and coordinate-cooperate with international on fields of labor skills for women.

Article 10: Responsibilities of Labor and Social Welfare Sector

Labor and Social Welfare Sector shall develop skills and capacities of women so that they can obtain opportunities of having jobs widely, training programmes on theories and practices; including modification of perceptions, customs, conventional beliefs, that hinder and deter opportunities of women in vocational and skill work development; encourage and promote other sectors, especially private sector to participate in the programmes of vocational and skill work development of women.

Article 11: Responsibilities of Women in Self-development

Women shall develop themselves by raising their knowledge in politics and ideology, regulations and law, economy, culture, national defense and public security, foreign affairs and environment; shall be their own master, build capacity on their own first and at the same time shall be given promotion and opportunities by families, concerned organizations and society.

Part III

Equality between women and men Article 12: Equality between women and men
Women and men have political, economical, social and cultural equality in the families as stipulated in Part III of the Law on Development and Protection of Women.

Article 13: Measures guaranteeing equality between women and men

State issues measures to guarantee equality between women and men on the basis of analyses of the situation and conditions of women in ethnicity, birth class, education,

environment and other factors.
To ensure equality between women and men the issues of physiology, society, culture and others including stereotyped roles of women and men and customs that create ill- attitudes towards women and inferior complex of women as well as violence in all forms against women that prevent women from having genuine equality with men shall be taken into consideration and resolved.

Those measures shall aim at the improvement of status of women in the society, answering the needs of women and making indispensable changes in social and cultural structure in order to improve and solve discrimination against women.

In the applications of those measures, there shall be regular assessments in various sectors with the participation of women.

Part IV

Deterring and Combating Trafficking in Persons especially in women and children Article 14: Composition of trafficking in persons especially in women and children
The trafficking in persons especially in women and children has the following compositions:	Recruitment,	Means,	Purposes.

Recruitment means procurement and harboring, delivery, movement, transportation of persons especially women and children in the country and abroad. Domestic transportation means movement from one point to another point throughout the country. International transportation means movement from the Lao PDR to other countries or from other countries to the Lao PDR or using the Lao PDR as the transit country.

Means refer to persuade, lure, instigate, deceive, threaten, oppress, debt bondage and other means to make women and children trust and consent.

Purposes of receipt of women and children are for exploitation of labor, prostitution, propagation of pornography, things that contradict with good national culture, removal of body's organs or for other illegal profits.

The above mentioning actions against children under 18 years old though it does not involve any of the means set forth in Paragraph 3 of this Article shall be considered trafficking in children as well.

Article 15: Types of the victims

There are 3 types of the victims of trafficking in persons especially in women and children:
Lao citizens, foreign nationals, stateless persons and foreigners residing in the Lao PDR and suffered from trafficking in persons in the Lao PDR.
Lao citizens, foreign nationals, stateless persons and foreigners residing in the Lao PDR but suffered from trafficking in persons committed overseas.	The victims who are foreigners suffered from trafficking in persons in the Lao PDR.

Article 16: Individuals having rights and obligations to inform

The following individuals have the rights to inform about trafficking in persons especially in women and children:	Victims;	Familial members of the victims.

Relatives and neighbors, other organizations such as: organizations of the Party, Government, local administrations at various levels, Lao Front for National Reconstruction, Mass organizations, social organizations, citizens who knew, saw or got information about trafficking in persons especially in women and children have the obligations to inform in order to help the victims.

Article 17: Individuals having the rights to be informed

The following organizations have the rights to be informed of trafficking in persons especially in women and children:	Police officers,	Lao Women's Union at various levels,	Local Administrations at various levels.	Police officers, embassies or consulates of the Lao PDR to where Lao people are victimized in overseas.

Article 18: Record of the information

In receiving the information, the informed officers shall record main information such as:	Location, date, time, name and family name, position of the informed;	Names and family names, ages, professions, addresses or offices of the victims and the informers,	Name and family name, age, profession, address or office of the accused,	Summary of the event: time, location, witnesses. In case there is/are witness/es, seek further information from the witness/es.
After having finished writing the record, the informed shall read the content of the record to the informer and all participants, then sign and fingerprint the minutes.

In case that the Lao Women Union or the Local Administration are the informed, the minutes of information shall be sent to the police immediately to help the victim and proceed on the case in accordance with the law.

Article 19: Proceeding against wrongdoers/offenders

After receiving information from individuals or organizations about trafficking in persons especially in women and children police officers shall investigate-interrogate rapidly, gather urgently information from victims or the informants as well as witnesses, apply other investigation-interrogation measures and deterring measures such as: detention, arrest, 'temporary' custody as per set forth in the law on proceeding criminalized cases, protection of confidentiality and insurance of safety. If there are concrete and sufficient evidence, dossier of cases shall be sent to the Public Prosecutors for prosecuting criminals and penalizing for damages, mental rehabilitation and others incurred costs

Article 20: Assisting the victims

After receiving information about or being informed of the trafficking in persons especially in women and children who are Lao citizens, foreign nationals, stateless persons and foreigners in the Lao PDR, the police shall coordinate with local authorities to render assistance to the victims promptly, delivering them to a safe shelter, and at the same time shall pursue lawsuit against the accused in accordance with the law.

For Lao citizens, foreign nationals, stateless persons living in the Lao PDR suffered from trafficking in persons in other countries or for foreigners suffered from trafficking in persons in the Lao PDR, paragraph 3 and 4 of Article 28 of the Law on Development and Protection of the women shall be applied.

Article 21: Necessary assistance

The necessary assistance to the victims composes of:	Assistance in nurturing and sheltering,	Legal assistance,	Medical assistance,	Assistance in short-term training,	Assistance in returning home and others.

Article 22: Assistance in shelter

The victims have the right to receive assistance in safe shelter, including food, medicines, clothing and necessary stuff, for which the Labor and Social Welfare section in coordination with the Lao Women Union at various levels and other concerned sections are responsible according to their roles and duties.

Article 23: Legal assistance

The victims have the right to receive legal assistance such as counseling, legal advice, lawyer and other protection in defending the case free of charge, having Lao Women's Union at each level as coordinator to deal with concerned sections such as Justice, Public Security, People's Court, Public Prosecutor and others.

Article 24: Medical assistance

The victims have the rights to receive medical assistance as following:
1.	Counseling in mental health and psychological treatments,

2.	Medical examinations, medical certification and treatments.

In case that the physician find or doubt that individuals who come to see him/her for medical examination are suffered from trafficking in persons especially trafficking in women and children including domestic violence, he/she shall report to the police immediately and send them to medical centers serving especially for cases.

In case that the victims are seriously suffered such as disability, HIV/AIDS infection, they shall be sent to concerned authorities for assistance.

Article 25: Assistance in short term training

The victims have the right to receive short term vocational training such as in tailoring, handicraft, beauty caring, food processing, hotel management, agriculture, livestock and others to enable them to have jobs, income and improve further their standard of living, for which the Labor and Social Welfare Section in coordination with the Lao Women's Union at various levels and other concerned sections are responsible in accordance with their roles and duties.

Article 26: Assistance in Returning home

Before sending the victims home, Labor and Social Welfare section and Lao Women's Union at various levels have the following duties:

1.	Coordinate with local administrative authorities to search for families, parents or relatives of the victims to explore conditions and readiness of receiving the victims as well as suitability of the victims returning to their families.
2.	Send the victims to their families, parents or relatives and entrust village administrative authorities, village Lao Women's Union to continue monitoring and assisting them.

In case that the victims are unable to return to their families due to certain reasons, Labor and Social Welfare Section plays a central role in coordinating with other concerned authorities to continue assisting them.

Article 27: Organizations having the duties to assist the victims

In assisting the victims of trafficking in persons especially trafficking in women and children including domestic violence, the Government of the Lao PDR entrusts responsibilities to the following organizations:	Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare,	Ministry of Public Health,
Ministry of Education,	National Committee for Combating Trafficking in Persons,	Ministry of Foreign Affairs,	Lao Women's Union,	Ministry of Public Security,	General Public Prosecutor,	People's Supreme Court,	Local Administrations.

The above-mentioned organizations shall plan to budget the assistance to the victims of trafficking in persons especially in women and children including domestic violence.

Besides, every Lao citizen has the obligations to render assistance to the victims of trafficking in persons and domestic violence.

Article 28: Responsibilities of Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare

Ministry of Labor and Social Welfare has the responsibilities of rehabilitating and protecting victims such as: provision of temporary safe shelter, vocational training, seeking jobs, searching for families, sending them home and other necessary assistances.

Article 29: Responsibilities of Ministry of Public Health

Ministry of Public Health has the responsibilities of rendering medical services to victims as stipulated in Article 24 of this Decree.

Article 30: Responsibilities of Ministry of Education

Ministry of Education has the responsibilities of providing non-formal education, short- term training, creating educational activities useful for victims.

Article 31

Responsibilities of National Committee for Combating Trafficking in Persons
National Committee for Combating Trafficking in Persons has the responsibilities of guiding in contents and establishing propagation plan on trafficking in persons; developing plans combating trafficking in persons especially in women and children at bilateral and multilateral level with neighboring countries, at the region; guiding the research and drafting proposals for law amendment and insertion of contents and necessary measures into the Law of the Lao PDR as well as supervising the uses of administrative and legal measures, actual coordination with neighboring countries and the region to deter and combat trafficking in persons effectively.

Article 32: Responsibilities of Ministry of Foreign Affairs

Ministry of Foreign Affairs has the responsibilities of coordinating with concerned authorities in the country and overseas such as embassies, consulates to render necessary assistance, facilitate the proceeding of lawsuit and repatriate the victims.

Article 33: Responsibilities of Lao Women's Union

Lao Women's Union has the responsibilities of receiving information, counseling, rehabilitating psychological damages, providing temporary safe shelter, short-term vocational training, giving legal and health advice, collaborating in providing evidence useful for the proceeding of lawsuit, protecting legitimate rights and benefits of women and children who are victims of trafficking in persons including domestic violence.

Article 34: Responsibilities of Ministry of Public Security

Ministry of Public Security has the responsibilities of guiding the police officers to carry out correct, accurate and quick investigation-interrogation of the cases of trafficking in persons especially in women and children, at the same time there shall be measures to protect confidentiality, evidence, data related to the cases and measures to protect safety of the victims, informants and witnesses, including the control of entries into and departures from the country of Lao citizen, foreign nationals, stateless persons and foreigners in order to deter and combat trafficking in persons especially in women and children including domestic violence.

Article 35: Responsibilities of General Public Prosecutor and People's Supreme Court

General Public Prosecutor and People's Supreme Court have the responsibilities of guiding the proceeding of cases against the accused related to trafficking in persons especially in women and children including domestic violence, coordinating with concerned authorities to organize training to upgrade knowledge of the investigators- interrogator, investigator officers, prosecutors and judges on proceeding the cases of trafficking in persons especially in women and children.

Article 36: Responsibilities of Local Administrative Authorities

Local Administrations have the responsibilities of propagating-educating citizens in their localities on the dangers of trafficking in persons especially in women and children including domestic violence, playing central roles in combating and deterring the trafficking, receiving information including victims who are delivered by referral organizations to their families, parents or relatives, continuing to educate, monitor, render material and spiritual assistance so that the victims can be reintegrated into the society and become good citizens.

Article 37: Responsibilities of citizens

Every citizen has the obligations to deter and combat trafficking in persons especially in women and children including domestic violence, render material and spiritual assistance to the victims on the basis of its own capacities.

Part V

Combating Domestic Violence against Women and Children Article 38: Act of domestic violence against women and children
Act of domestic violence against women and children is an action and negligence of any members of the family that create damages to the body, mind or assets of women and children in the family.
Act of the use of domestic violence against women and children is any activity that causes losses in life, health, mind, liberty, dignity or assets resulting from beating, torture, detention, tying, oppression, preventing from undertaking social activities, rape, illegal divorce, adultery, insults, scorn, allegation, defamation, burning, destructing premises and other things, wasting the assets of the family.

Negligence constituting a domestic violence against women and children is a non-compliance with what stipulated in the law or with what husband, family members shall be done to each other, which causes psychological damages or health to women and children in family shown by the acts of refusal of obligations in caring for-feeding the family, when delivering a child, miscarrying or getting sick, the act of not protecting right and benefits of wife and children when being harassed, the act of not sharing work for the improved standards of living of the family and the act of not sharing responsibilities of educating children to be good citizens.

Article 39: Degrees of domestic violence against women and children

There are two degrees of domestic violence against women and children: minor and severe domestic violence.
Minor domestic violence is an act of:	Gossip and allegation,	Scorn,	Insults,	Defamation,	Preventing from undertaking social activities,	Not sharing responsibilities of educating children to be good citizens.
Severe domestic violence is an act of:	Beating, torture,	Detention,	Tying,	Oppression,	Rape,	Adultery,	Illegal divorce,	Rudeness,	Burning,	Destructing of premises and other things,
Wasting the assets of the family,	Not taking responsibilities of caring for the family, when delivering a child or getting sick.	Not protecting right and benefits of wife and children when being harassed.

Article 40: Assisting victims of minor domestic violence

In helping victims of minor domestic violence, members of families, relatives, nearby persons who see the case must intervene to stop it, prohibit the violence, mediate and educate the parties.

Article 41: Procedure of assistance to the settlement of cases

For minor domestic violence against women and children the following procedures shall be taken:	Members of family and close relatives educate the parties,	Nearby persons, mediation units at the village level, counseling and protecting women and children units continue to educate or mediate.

Article 42: Mediation

Having received information or requests on domestic violence against women and children, counseling and protecting women and children unit of the village must study it within 7 days in coordination with concerned authorities, fix date, venue and invite the parties and witnesses to attend mediation sessions.
The mediation sessions can be held for one or several occasions, minutes of the session must be written on each occasion; the minutes must be read in front the parties, witnesses, signed and fingerprinted. On each session the parties must pay service fees of 50,000 Kips.

If the parties could not reach settlement, village mediation unit notes its observation in the minutes and forwards the dossier of the case to the District Justice Office, Municipal to carry out the second mediation. In case that the settlement could not be reached, the parties have the rights to bring it to the People's Court.

Article 43: Assisting victims of severe domestic violence

In assisting victims of severe domestic violence members of family or witnesses must help immediately such as separate the parties, in case there is injured they must send the injured to hospital and at the same time they shall inform village administrative authorities and the police officers. Besides, witnesses have the right to arrest the offenders and send him/her to the police officers promptly to take necessary measures in accordance with the law such as custody, arrest, detention, spacing out the employment or depose and others.

Article 44: Informers

Individuals who have the right to inform on domestic violence are:	Victims,	Members of family of the victims,	Close relatives, nearby persons and others who see the cases.
Informing shall be done orally, by phone call, or in written form. The informers will be secured and protected accordingly to the law.

Article 45: The informed

Individuals who have the right to be informed on domestic violence against women and children are:	Village administration,	Village counseling and protecting women and children units,	Organizations that the victims belong to and	The Police.

Article 46: Minutes/records of information

Minutes/records of information on domestic violence against women and children shall be done as minutes of the information on trafficking in women and children as stipulated in Article 18 of this Decree.

Article 47: Necessary assistance to victims

The victims of domestic violence have the rights to receive necessary assistance in food and accommodation, legal matters, health, short-term vocational training and repatriation as stipulated in Articles 21, 22, 23, 24, 25 and 26 of this Decree.

Article 48: Organizations responsible for providing assistance to the victims

The assistance to the victims of domestic violence shall be treated as the assistance to the victims of trafficking in persons especially trafficking in women and children as stipulated in Articles 28, 29, 30, 32, 33, 34, 35, 36 and 37 of this Decree.

Part VI

Counseling and protection women and children Article 49: Counseling and protection women and children
Women and children have the right to receive services of counseling and advices related to their legitimate rights and benefits such as on law, mentality, health and others.

Article 50

Organizations responsible for counseling and protection of women and children
The following organizations have the responsibilities for counseling and protection of women and children:	Center for counseling and protection of women and children;	Offices of counseling and protection of women and children of the provinces, Capital;	Offices of counseling and protection of women and children of districts, municipality;	Unit of counseling and protection of women and children of the villages.

Article 51

Framework and roles of organizations for counseling and protection of women and children
The organizations for counseling and protection of women and children are organizations of the Central, Provincial, District and Village Lao Women's Union, which play roles of counseling, receiving appeals or mediating issues related to legitimate rights and benefits of women and children, at the same time coordinate with concerned organizations to collect data and solve problems according to their responsibilities.

Village Unit for Counseling and Protection of Women and Children also plays the above mentioned roles in its own village.

Article 52

Duties and rights of the Center for Counseling and Protection of Women and Children
The Center for Counseling and Protection of Women and Children has the following duties and rights:

1. Be a core agency assisting the Lao Women's Union in studying, formulating and improving law and regulations related to legitimate rights of women and children;

2. Develop implementation plans of counseling and protection of women and children;

3. Build, refresh and upgrade level of knowledge and capacities of personnel on counseling and protection of women and children;
4. Organize training, propagate the constitution, law and treaties related to benefits of women and children;

5. Guide, encourage and monitor the implementation of regulations and law related to legitimate rights of women and children in accordance with its responsibilities;
6. Assist the victims affected by domestic violence and trafficking in persons especially in women and children as stipulated in Article 33 of this Decree;

7. Receive information, study appeals, requests of women and children;
8. Coordinate with concerned authorities to collect data, participate in, encourage and monitor the deliberation of the settlement of appeals, proposals related to legitimate rights and benefits of women and children;

9. Inform the outputs of settlements of appeals and requests to its presenters;

10. Organize, in coordination with concerned authorities, short-term vocational training for victims depending on the real circumstances;

11. Summarize statistics, data relating to women and children who come in for counseling in order to coordinate with concerned authorities to find ways for settlements;

12. Report regularly its activities to the superiors;

13. Undertake other duties and rights as stipulated in the law and regulations.

Article 53

Structure of the Center for Counseling and Protection of Women and Children
The Center for Counseling and Protection of Women and Children is equivalent to a department and consists of the following divisions:
1. Legal Counseling and Law Propagation Division;
2. Psychological Counseling Division;
3. Health Counseling Division;
4. Training and Income Generating Division;
5. Division for Planning and Cooperation;
6. Administration and Finance Division.

Article 54

Structure of personnel of the Center for Counseling and Protection of Women and Children
It consists of: Director; One or two Deputy Director(s); Managers of Division. Deputy Managers of Division. Some technical and administrative staff.

Besides the above- mentioned permanent staff, there are also non-permanent staff who are coordinators from Justice department, Public Security, Public health, Labor and Social Welfare, Education and others.

Article 55

Duties and Rights of the Provincial Office for Counseling and Protection of Women and Children

Provincial Office for Counseling and Protection of Women and Children has the following duties and rights:
1. Develop implementation plan of counseling and protection of women and children;

2. Train, refresh and upgrade knowledge and capacity of personnel on counseling and protection of women and children;
3. Organize training, propagate the constitution, law and treaties related to rights, benefits of women and children;

4. Guide, encourage and monitor the implementation of law and regulations related to legitimate rights of women and children in accordance with its responsibilities;
5. Receive information, study appeals, requests of women and children;

6. Coordinate with concerned organizations to collect data, participate in, encourage and monitor the deliberation of the settlement of appeals, requests related to legitimate rights and benefits of women and children;

7. Inform the outputs of settlements, appeals and requests to its presenters;

8. Organize, in coordination with concerned authorities, short-term vocational training for victims depending on the real circumstances;

9. Summarize statistics, data relating to women and children who come in for counseling in order to coordinate with concerned authorities to find ways for settlement;

10. Report regularly its activities to superiors.

11. Undertake other duties and rights as stipulated in the law and regulations.

Article 56

Personnel structure of the Provincial Office for Counseling and Protection of Women and Children
The Office of the Provincial Counseling and Protection of Women and Children consists of: Chief of the Office, One or two Deputy chief of the Office, Some technical and administrative staff.

The position of the chief of the Provincial Counseling and Protection of Women and Children Office is equivalent to that of the chief of provincial and Vientiane Capital Lao Women's Union.

In addition to the above-mentioned permanent staff, there are also non-permanent staffs who are coordinators from Divisions of Justice, Public Security, Public Health and Social Welfare, Education and others.

Article 57

Duties and Rights of District Office for Counseling and Protection of Women and Children
The District Counseling Office for Counseling and Protection of Women and Children has the following duties and rights:
1. Develop implementation plan of counseling and protection of women and children;
2. Plan for training, refreshing and upgrading the knowledge and capacity of personnel on counseling and protection of women and children;

3. Organize training, propagate the constitution, law and treaties related to benefits of women and children;

4. Guide, encourage and monitor the implementation of law related to legitimate rights, benefits of women and children in accordance with its responsibilities.

5. Receive information, study appeals, requests of women and children.

6. Coordinate with concerned organizations to collect data, participate in, encourage and monitor the deliberation of appeals, requests related to legitimate rights and benefits of women and children;
7. Inform the outputs of settlements of appeals and requests to its presenters;

8. Coordinate with concerned organizations in organizing short-term vocational training for victims depending on the real circumstances;
9. Summarize statistics, data relating to women and children who come in for counseling in order to coordinate with concerned authorities to find ways for settlement;

10. Report regularly its activities to the superiors;

11. Undertake other duties and rights as stipulated in the law and regulations.

Article 58

Personnel structure of District Office for Counseling and Protection of Women and Children
The District Office for Counseling and Protection of Women and Children consists of: Chief of the Office, One Deputy chief, Some Technical and administrative staff.

The position of the chief of the District Counseling Office is equivalent to that of the chief of District and municipality Lao Women's Union.

In addition to the above-mentioned permanent staff, there are also non-permanent staffs who are coordinators from sections of Justice, Public Security, Public Health and Social Welfare, Education and others.

Article 59

Duties and Rights of Village Unit for Counseling and Protection of Women and Children
The Village Unit for Counseling and Protection of Women and Children has the following duties and rights:
1.	Receive and provide services of counseling to women and children;

2.	Cooperate with concerned authorities to collect data concerning the requests and appeals related to legitimate benefits of women and children;

3.	Receive information and take part in the deliberation, mediation on issues related to appeals, requests of women and children in line with its roles and duties;
4.	Summarize statistics, data on women and children who come in for counseling in order to coordinate with concerned authorities to find ways for settlement;

5.	Report regularly its activities to the superiors;
6.	Undertake other duties and rights as stipulated in the law and regulations.

Article 60

Personnel structure of the Unit for Counseling and Protection of Women and Children
Unit for Counseling and Protection of Women and Children consists of the Village Lao Women's Union leader and some assistants.

Article 61

Nomination of Personnel of Organizations for Counseling and Protection of Women and Children
Nominating, transferring or deposing personnel of the center, offices and units shall be done in accordance with the Law on Government and the Law on Local Administrations.

Article 62

Standards and Conditions of Officials for Counseling and Protection of Women and Children
Counseling and Protection of Women and Children officials shall:
1.	Be a Lao citizen, aged 25 or over;
2.	Have a firm political position;
3.	Have knowledge, capacity suitable for the work, revolutionary virtues, be loyal to the nation, to the benefits of the state, communities and citizens;
4.	Have studied, trained in law, psychology, counseling, social welfare and health;

5.	Be in good health;
6.	Have never been sentenced by courts.

Article 63: Contents of Counseling and Protection of Women and Children

The contents of counseling and Protection of Women and Children constitute:
Legal counseling such as: explaining contents of the law related to the cases of individuals who come in for counseling, giving recommendations on how to protect their legitimate rights and benefits;
Psychological counseling such as: giving encouragement, warmth, recommending alternatives so that they are psychologically strong and able to solve problems by themselves;
Health counseling and others such as: examination, certification, giving advices on health care, medical treatment, feeding, rest.

Article 64: Budget for counseling and protection of women and children

The budget for counseling and protection of women and children comes from the government's budget, in country and foreign contributions of individual, juristic persons, communities, National Front for Reconstruction, mass organizations, social organizations, international organizations and from others activities.

Article 65: Principles of Working

Organizations for counseling and protection of women and children practice the principles of centralized democracy, work on planning basis, collective leadership, combination with a clear- cut division of functions and responsibilities in the performance of their duties.

The counseling and protection of women and children offices has their own seals using for official work.

Part VII

Women Development Fund Article 66: Creating Women Development Fund
The government of the Lao PDR creates Women Development Fund to ensure that the development and protection of women and children are more effective.

Article 67: Sources of the Women Development Fund

Sources of the Women Development Fund are from the government budget, contribution of individuals, juristic persons, community, Lao Front for National Reconstruction, Mass

Organizations, Social organizations, International Organizations and from others activities.

Article 68: Management and uses of the Fund

Every activity of the fund shall be undertaken according to regulations of the fund and concerned law, especially law on budget.
Women Development Fund will be utilized in developing and protecting women and children especially in physical, mental, educational, vocational and skill work development, in propagating law, regulations and technical principles on the development, in upgrading knowledge and capacity of women, in counseling, in providing necessary and urgent assistance to women and children suffered from trafficking in persons and domestic violence, in managing the fund, in rewarding individuals who have outstanding performance in women development.

There are separate regulations for the organization, management and activities of the women development fund.

Part VIII

Management and Monitoring of the Development and Protection Women and Children

Article 69: Roles of Management and Monitoring

Management and monitoring of the development and protection of women are the duties of concerned authorities of the state as stipulated in Article 43 of the Law on Development and Protection of Women, having Lao Women's Union plays a central role in coordinating with concerned authorities for harmony and effectiveness.

Article 70: Contents of Monitoring

Monitoring has to have focal areas which shall focus on the translation of law into details under one's responsibilities such as: the formulation of decree, agreements, recommendations and regulations relating to the development and protection of women.

In addition, monitoring is also focusing on the implementation of law and regulations related to development and protection of women, reflecting the general situation, strengths and weaknesses including proposed methodology and measures to solve the problems.

Article 71: Monitoring Method

Monitoring shall be held regularly once a year. In case of necessity, monitoring can be held before scheduled.

Monitoring is undertaken by convening joint meetings between the Lao Women's Union and concerned authorities to consult and review the implementation of the law. Representatives from the Lao Front for National Construction, Lao People's Revolutionary Youth Organization, Lao trade Union and Local Administration could be invited to attend the meetings. Agenda and contents of the meeting shall be prepared so that attendees can provide comments.
After finishing the monitoring, report shall be made and submitted to their superiors regularly.

Part XI Rewards and Sanctions

Article 72: Rewards for outstanding performances of individuals

The outstanding individuals shall be awarded:

1.	Labor medal, labor insignia
2.	Certificate of Merits
3.	Certificate of Congratulations
4.	Other kinds of rewards

The concerned authorities are entrusted to consider and carry out the procedures of rewarding individuals or organizations.

Article 73: Sanctions against offenders

Individuals or organizations violating the Law and Decree on Development and Protection of Women shall be sanctioned in accordance with Article 48, 49, 50, 51 and 52 of the Law on Development and Protection Women.

In the case that individuals or organizations practice discrimination against women, deter the use of their rights, and do not promote their development and protection, such individuals or organizations shall be warned, educated and punished on the basis of severity of the case or negligence.

Part X Final Provisions

Article 74: Implementation

Lao Women's Union, ministries, Lao Front for National Construction, mass organizations and local administrations are entrusted to make action plan and detailed measures in order to successfully implement this Decree.

Article 75: Entry into force

This Decree shall enter into force on the date of signature. All regulations previously promulgated that are inconsistent with this Decree are suspended.

Prime Minister of the Lao PDR

Bounnhang Vorachit
